https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h9Bp7AuUh_E
Is Being Smart Worth the Depression? - Alex O’Connor & Joe Folley (4K)
62,239 views  Oct 27, 2025  Modern Wisdom
Go see Chris live in America - https://chriswilliamson.live

Alex O’Connor is a YouTuber, writer and a podcaster.

Joe Folley is a philosopher, writer, and host of the Unsolicited Advice YouTube channel.

Philosophy has spent thousands of years trying to teach us how to live well. But the deeper you go, the darker it gets. So what’s the point? What can we take from all that heaviness, and how do we find beauty in the darkness to make our own lives better?

Expect to learn if philosophy always meant to be practically applicable, or if that is that a modern reinterpretation, which ancient schools have been most unfairly ignored, which branches of philosophy should be jettisoned entirely, why everyone hate philosophy of mind, the differences between academic and practical philosophy, the darkest philosophies you’ve probably never heard of, why modern discourse always feel ironic and why no one speaks earnestly any more and much more…

-

0:00 Can Philosophy Actually Help You Live Better?
6:04 Is Modern Philosophy Trying to Be Too Intellectual?
11:44 What Do Philosophers Often Overlook?
22:35 Why Philosophy Can Feel a Bit Depressing
33:41 Is Life Worth Living?
44:47 Why Context Matters in Understanding Philosophers
54:24 Why is There Growing Interest in Panpsychism?
01:08:40 Is Consciousness Unified?
01:23:59 Emotivism 101: The Morality of Emotion
01:29:03 Is Morality Just Vibes?
01:40:59 Emotivism and the Incest Question
01:49:05 Do Philosophy Influencers Have a Moral Duty?

-

Get Free Travel Packs, Free Liquid Vitamin D, and more from AG1 at https://ag1.info/modernwisdom

Get $100 off the best bloodwork analysis in America at https://functionhealth.com/modernwisdom

Get 35% off your first subscription on the best supplements from Momentous at https://livemomentous.com/modernwisdom

Get a Free Sample Pack of LMNT’s most popular flavours with your first purchase at https://drinklmnt.com/modernwisdom

-

Get access to every episode 10 hours before YouTube by subscribing for free on Spotify - https://spoti.fi/2LSimPn or Apple Podcasts - https://apple.co/2MNqIgw

Get my free Reading List of 100 life-changing books here - https://chriswillx.com/books/

Try my productivity energy drink Neutonic here - https://neutonic.com/modernwisdom

-

Get in touch in the comments below or head to...
Instagram:   / chriswillx   
Twitter:   / chriswillx  
Email: https://chriswillx.com/contact/

---

Can Philosophy Actually Help You Live Better?
0:00
Was philosophy always meant to be practically applicable or is that some modern reinterpretation?
0:06
Uh that's a joke question. Oh well, I mean I suppose one of the uh differences
0:11
between like very broadly speaking between something like ancient uh ancient Greek philosophy say and the way
0:17
that we conceive of philosophy today is that you know philosophy today is largely thought of in terms of different fields. You've got your kind of
0:23
epistemologists who discuss questions like you know what is knowledge and you know more importantly how do we how do
0:28
we attain knowledge? um what are the kinds of systems and processes that produce reliable knowledge? That kind of
0:33
stuff. And then there are kind of ethicists talking about, you know, what is the good life? You know, vitally important question. Also, you know, what
0:39
are what are the right things to do? And then you've got kind of logicians talking about um you do do a lot of
0:44
proofs and try to often model uh ordinary things um using formal
0:50
mathematical or at least semi-mathematical systems. You got philosophers of language, philosophers, science. Um certainly uh for in the ancient world
0:57
these weren't as differentiated certainly as they are today and so um
1:02
you know Aristotle wrote different treatises on these different topics but um even in his philosophy everything is
1:11
so interlin and if you go you know back before Aristotle it's very very hard to separate these so for example um the
1:17
stoics uh although you know in kind of popular discourse around stoicism today we talk a lot about stoic ethics
1:23
um the Stoics thought that their ethics fell out of their metaphysics and their logic which was their word for what we
1:30
would call today things like logic and epistemology and um so I think that's that's um that's one major difference in
1:36
terms of practicality I mean yeah the a lot of ancient philosophy is incredibly practical you know these are especially
1:41
you know the the one of the paramount um questions that are asked that's asked by almost every um ancient philosopher is
1:48
you know how to live a good life the the first philosopher um like
1:53
like receive wisdom is Thales. Uh he's a kind of ancient ancient Greek philosopher. Um but before that there
2:01
there are lots of kind of we have scraps of like ancient uh Egyptian um
2:07
philosophies and things like and they're they're often concerned with you know what's the good life? How do we live it? Um so I I think philosophy philosophy is
2:13
eminently practical. I also think, you know, maybe this is just my own bias sh I think that I think that um today philosophy at its best is is often very
2:20
practical. How has something gone arry? Is there some
2:26
sense that modern philosophy a lot of that is kind of like string theory and physics where there's not much progress
2:31
being made in quite the same way for people's practical applicability. We're trying to do the ethics without the metaphysics. As Joe just said, like
2:38
a lot of these ancient philosophers in particular are remembered for their ethical teachings. The Stoics, you might know what a Stoic is. It's someone who
2:45
sort of is resistant to to suffering and pleasure and is sort of neutral. But but why? Because of their metaphysics,
2:52
because of what they believe was true about the world. Same thing with Epicuranism. Uh people might know that Epicurus, for example, thought that you
2:58
shouldn't worry about death. You know, like death is nothing to us. He said literally nothing to us because when
3:04
you're alive, it's not with you. And when it's with you, there's no you. that stems out of the Epicurian tradition of
3:11
materialism. They were staunch materialists. They believed that everything, including the human soul, was made up of matter. So that when that
3:18
goes, there's there's nothing left. And it seems like they really thought that
3:24
these metaphysical commitments were what led to these ethical commitments. And so if all you have are the ethical
3:30
commitments now, that there isn't really a way to make progress because ethics is kind of conjectural if it doesn't have a
3:36
metaphysical grounding. It's just like, you know, what feels like it works, what feels like it vibes with your worldview.
3:42
I mean, I think a lot of people approach these philosophies now. They'll look at stoicism and epicuranism,
3:47
utilitarianism, emotivism, and they'll sort of think, which of these do I do I like? Yeah, that makes sense to me. And
3:54
they sort of adopt it. So, all that's really being done by reading these philosophies is some ancient guy
4:00
elucidating something you already kind of believe. So, you're not going to make much progress in terms of actually
4:06
developing your thought unless you believe something new that's true about the world that will cause you to commit
4:12
to something else. You know what I mean? So, it it's like, you know, if you ask someone what stoicism is on the street or indeed in a podcast, they would list,
4:20
you know, 50 different things before they told you anything about their metaphysical claims about what they actually thought the world was made of.
4:26
It'd all be about you know how to live your life in um oh sorry in Stoics for you know
4:32
the kind of one of the reasons why um Stoics so big on uh acceptance and accepting things uh things that happen
4:37
to you and accepting that the the kind of state of the world um in kind of very very broad strokes is that um the stoics
4:44
were big believers in what today we would recognize as something like divine providence um you know they had a real
4:50
kind of teological view of reality. They thought that the universe was inherently rational, inherently
4:56
reasonable and as a result this whatever is happening is in accordance with the
5:01
rational will of the universe. So there's kind of you know there's it's sort of a you know in modern stoicism
5:07
people tend not to have that assumption baked in but this is a huge part of of ancient stoicism and it's actually
5:13
interesting to the kind of we see you know we talking about kind of how um
5:18
things get stripped away over time even in the difference between Greek and Roman stoicism you already see less
5:23
emphasis placed on stoic logic for example you know um Chrysopus I have no idea if I'm pronouncing that correctly
5:29
but he wrote you know reams and reams of parchment on stoic logical systems and
5:35
you know you you don't you don't even see that in my favorite stoic philosopher Epictitus you know there's he's not that concerned with stoic logic
5:41
and I think you know he's the kind of the goat of Roman stoicism and you know so it's not like it's not like a
5:46
necessarily just a modern thing of this of stripping back aspects of of of philosophies but of course you know
5:52
there is an argument to be made that this is part of what development consists of um although I do think it's
5:58
sometimes worth going back and going back and revisiting some of the assumptions that maybe um we ought to
6:03
ought to reconsider. Is it fair to say well I guess at least for me good avatar for the lay person?
Is Modern Philosophy Trying to Be Too Intellectual?
6:11
Uhhuh. Uh when you think about development, you think about sort of refining over time
6:16
about becoming sort of more accurate, more detailed, uh seeing things with a higher resolution. Uh, how fair is it to
6:24
say that modern philosophy is more sort of concerned with intellectual masturbation than it is teaching people
6:31
fundamental questions about themselves and the world? Very fair indeed. Um, I think that
6:37
philosophy doesn't develop in the way that something like physics does. The
6:43
idea with something like physics is that you're born into a world with a particular understanding. You develop
6:49
that understanding. You learn new things. You maybe dig a bit further down into an atom and you find out what it's made of. And then you have children and
6:56
you tell those children as a starting point, this is what atoms are made of. And then they're off to the races trying to go even further. Philosophy, I don't
7:02
think quite works in the same way. You might disagree with this. I don't know. I think it's instead of something which
7:08
you sort of go from ignorance to knowledge over the course of 20 generations. You go from the course you
7:13
go from ignorance to knowledge over the course of one generation and everybody has to sort of start a fresh. Which is why you find that these ancient
7:19
philosophers and early modern philosophers and modern philosophers and guaranteed future philosophers too are
7:25
all essentially saying the same thing. You know, if you read um if you read
7:31
Epicurian philosophy, it's kind of very similar to utilitarianism. It's it's got a very sort of similar thread. At the
7:37
very least, it seems to be based on similar intuitions. So you might sort of think that philosophy is a bit stagnant
7:43
that it hasn't actually progressed anywhere, but it's maybe not kind of what it's supposed to do. You know, you're supposed to do that throughout
7:49
your own your own life. You know, somebody asked chat GBT what it's like to be itself. I imagine you've probably
7:56
done this. You've done everything with chat GBT. Everything within reason. Not everything. Not everything. Everything within reason. Within reason. Yeah. Yeah.
8:03
Subscribe. He said it. Um, and one of the things that it said was, uh, imagine basically
8:11
every time that you had a conversation, your memory of the last one was wiped. Each new context window is a brand new.
8:17
So, it makes me think about what you're talking about here. This generation needs to rediscover or it it tries to
8:22
answer the same questions over and over and over again. Because the important stuff with philosophy is probably the
8:28
way that it allows you to live a a good life or or a life that you see fit um or
8:33
to console you in some some regard and and that is something that will happen over the course of an individual life. I
8:39
would take what chatb says with a pinch of salt um because of course it probably
8:45
is not in fact conscious but it does give us an interesting sort of like uh inn for thinking about what it might be
8:51
like to be such a creature. What would it be like not only to have your memory wiped every time you started a new day
8:57
or conversation, but also to kind of be one thing with many avatars? You know, like chatbt is one thing. We're speaking
9:03
about it as one entity, but you've could have a conversation on your phone. I like to have a conversation on my phone with it. And it's this sort of one
9:09
thing, but having two distinct and separable. And I think that a lot of a
9:15
lot of philosophies kind of view human beings in the same way. You know this is how uh this is how an ancient uh Indian
9:23
philosopher like who's reading or indeed composing the upanishads might think about human consciousness that it's sort
9:29
of all one consciousness that somehow the the localizing of of individual
9:34
selves is a is kind of an illusion and it's all just sort of one big thing and we're probably somehow restricted in the
9:41
sense that we have our our like memories and our localized experiences. But if we knew the truth, if we could somehow step
9:46
outside of that, we'd recognize that we're all actually just one big thing. So I imagine if JGPT was conscious, it
9:51
would probably be a little bit like that. It would be this sort of illusory
9:57
uh individuation across across different computers and things, which is what a lot of philosophers think is going on in
10:03
human beings. It's interesting to talk about kind of because there are clearly elements to how um you know people kind
10:10
of go on their own uh have to wrestle with the questions of what makes a good life for themselves. I
10:16
do have a thing that you know we can we can chart progress in certain philosophical problems and it's it's
10:21
more nebulous than others. One of the um one of philosophy's historic successes
10:27
is just creating lots of new fields. So of course so so so you know something
10:32
like something philosophers are good at making jobs for philosophers philosophers are good at making jobs for for other other academics. So you know
10:38
like like originally maths was inseparable from philosophy and then you know that becomes its own field of study and you know physics is originally
10:45
rolled into philosophy and it becomes its own field of study. Economics is another one that stems from philosophy. I mean you know something like um
10:51
psychoanalytic theory or or psychology you know this this comes from partly
10:56
from Freud. Freud is although he denies ever reading nature his theories are so
11:02
incredibly uh influenced by by nature and and by by earlier philosophical thinkers. So I I do think that one it's
11:08
very um it's very easy to hide some of philosophy's successes partly because quite a lot of the time
11:13
they are they're hidden away they're handed off to other fields. You know, I think that I think this I think this is
11:19
a point that Bertram Russell made was this idea that, you know, um phil one of the the measures of philosophy's
11:24
efficacy is just in giving birth to to to other fields. You know, linguistics is another one. You know, very very sort of philanthropic
11:31
uh field in that way. You could you I mean you could also argue that it's taking credit for other people's work further down the line, but
11:36
Okay. Yeah. You know, that that that's um that's sound like Alex actually. Um
11:43
uh so you mentioned stoicism there. Are there some ancient schools that you
What Do Philosophers Often Overlook?
11:48
think have been most unfairly ignored? You know we if you were to ask any
11:53
person about give me some ancient schools of philosophy stoicism would be up top. Maybe they'd think Buddhism
11:59
toism or something. They go oh I'm going to be like real uh a different approach to this. I'm going to go to the other
12:05
side of the planet. But beyond that we're probably really bouncing off the limit of most people's knowledge. Are
12:10
there some schools that you think you should have got a little bit more time at the table? I think well yeah I
12:16
mean you're quite right to point out that certainly any western thinker is is
12:21
probably going to have neglected eastern philosophy to a significant degree but even within so-called western thought um
12:28
yeah I suppose one thing that jumped out at me while you were speaking it's not so much a school but an idea which is like um I've been thinking a lot about
12:36
like Aristotilian metaphysics so from Aristotle right and when I ask people
12:42
about cause and effect like what causes particular things to occur. Aristotle famously, one of the foundational like
12:49
uh doctrines of his of his metaphysics is that there are four kinds of causation that go into any anything.
12:56
Like why is this beautiful and tasty can of Newtonic on the table? Well, it's got four different kinds of explanations.
13:02
There is its formal cause, which is sort of the the shape that it takes. There's its material cause, which is the stuff
13:09
that it's made out of, right? We we don't think of the stuff that it's made out of strictly speaking as a cause, but
13:15
it's clearly part of the causal story that puts this on the table. There is the efficient cause, which is like who
13:21
actually made it, right? You put this together, somebody put it in a can, I put it on the table. And finally, there
13:26
is the final cause, which is what it was done for, what it's going towards, the
13:32
teological cause. In the modern era, we essentially when we talk about
13:37
causation, we just talk about the efficient cause. If I say like, why is that on the table? And you say, well,
13:44
because because I put it there, question is answered. But I think that neglects a lot of really important questions about like
13:50
the nature of the thing itself, why it's there in that particular time slice, taking that shape with that particular form. I think we neglect that. And I
13:57
think that modern science is lacking in that it's only seems to con concern
14:04
itself ultimately with efficient causes and maybe a little bit of the the material cause too in that like if you
14:11
ask a scientist in a laboratory in a laboratory um you know why is that
14:18
shuttle like flying and escaping the atmosphere? They'll say oh because it has an an escape velocity and the thrust
14:24
of the rockets. But if you ask the same scientist at the pub, they'll say because we wanted to go to the moon. And
14:30
suddenly they become an arisetilian again. And I think that the the influence of these other kinds of
14:35
causation isn't isn't really there. The only other thing that came to mind is um potentially the the prescratics, you
14:42
know, and Joe already said that the the sort of first philosopher as it was uh as it were was Thales. Um but people
14:48
might have thought when he went to say that well the first philosopher that people generally think of is Socrates. And if you ask somebody who was the
14:54
first philosopher, they'll say Socrates. But there's, you know, Socrates didn't just spring up ex Neilo, you know, he's he's working uh in sometimes and him and
15:02
Aristotle and Plato, they're working sometimes in response to, but certainly after and contemporary with other thinkers too, who a lot of the time
15:08
their ideas just, you know, because they weren't particularly popular or didn't win the war of ideas we don't even know about. Palmenades didn't think that
15:15
change could occur. In fact, you've heard of Zeno's paradoxes. So Zeno had this these wonderful paradoxes of motion
15:21
where like I can't clap my hands because first I'd have to half the distance then half the distance then half the distance
15:27
and you can't complete an infinite series of tasks so I can't clap my hands. Everybody knows about Zeno's paradoxes but do they know that the
15:33
reason he came up with them is because he was following in the school of Palades who believed that change was
15:39
literally impossible and these were paradoxes which were kind of supposed to demonstrate the paradoxical nature of
15:45
change for that reason. Again, we've got the conclusion, but we haven't got the working. And sometimes the working is
15:51
the most interesting stuff. You know, the um I I I definitely concur with the kind of neglect of aspects of Aristotle
15:57
thought. I mean, especially really with regards to something like Aristotle's ethics, you know, the Aristotle's book,
16:04
The Nikameakian Ethics, is I would say, you know, even after over 2,000 years,
16:10
the most useful book of philosophy for anyone to read. I would say, you know, go on and get yourself a coffee copy.
16:15
They're great. There are some excellent translations. And um the most recent Penguin one is an excellent translation.
16:21
And Aristotle's ethics is I think one of its real strengths is that it's incredibly realistic. So he's very very
16:27
concerned with with virtues. Um but as opposed to say someone like certain stoic thinkers and
16:33
also the cynics. Um Aristotle denies that virtue is sufficient for a for a
16:38
good or flourishing lie. He's very when he, you know, he's he's very good at getting down to brass tax. You know,
16:44
he kind of at one point during the Nicin ethics, he basically says, you know, like there is no philosophy that's going to make you happy on the rack. You know,
16:51
that you you always need certain like minimal levels of of your physical needs fulfilled in order to just like calm
16:57
down the the bestial part of you that recognizes that you need to eat and breathe and sleep in order to live. Um,
17:04
and I think that, you know, and and again, Aristotle has a number of incredibly, um, I think still incredibly
17:10
insightful, ethical insights that sometimes sound obvious when you say them out loud, but uh, we're talking before before we started filming about
17:16
the the idea that actually sometimes very very obvious things bear repeating
17:21
because we just forget them very very easily. I mean, you know, uh, this was again a point that Toltoy made where he
17:26
talked about, uh, that idea of loving your neighbor as yourself. And tobacas says, "Yeah, like that sounds trit, but
17:32
have we ever got round to doing that?" And he argues that we haven't, and I'll probably concur. And one of Aristotle's
17:38
ideas here is is I'll just focus on two. One of them is is the idea of a golden bean. So his um
17:44
his idea that that virtue lies between the poles of two vices. You know, being brave is is in between being cowardly
17:49
and being reckless. Uh being generous is in between being, you know, proflegate and being misely. And you know, he has
17:56
and I I think that that's a very useful framework. you know, it sounds, you know, almost like common sense when you say it out loud, but actually attempting
18:02
to think in these terms can be incredibly useful. And the other thing that Aristotle really that I'm so bullish on um with regards to to
18:09
Aristotle is he's got an incredibly wor well worked out theory of friendship. It's in two books, book eight and nine
18:15
of the nicome ethics and it's some of the the best writing on friendship I
18:20
think there's ever been. Aristotle um in some ways following in the footsteps of of um some people thinkers like Epicurus
18:27
was very very big fan of of friendship. Actually I'm getting my timeline's confused there. But either way, you know, Aristotle is incredibly um he
18:34
thinks that having a group of friends and and moreover friends that you're uh that are friendships of virtue. So
18:40
friends that you're not just you're not just there because you enjoy their company. You're not just there because you you know they have something that
18:45
you want and you're trying to get at. you know, the way that someone might might schmoo up to their boss or or or just you're friends with somebody but
18:51
simply because you enjoy their company. These are friends who are sort of getting together in order to make one another more
18:57
virtuous and moreover hold like duties and loyalties to one another. You know, Aristotle thinks that this is these are
19:03
enormously contributive factors to your life. You owe them things. You know, this is a I think can be can be a real
19:10
antidote to the sort of you know ah nobody owes anyone anything anymore. you know that that kind of that that that
19:15
approach to life which I think is sort of can be very unhelpfully individualistic. And yeah, I think that sometimes stepping into the the
19:21
footsteps of of an ancient thinker like Aristotle um is uh one way to to sort of you know get
19:27
a bit of get a bit of distance from the way that we might currently live. And I think that books eight and nine of the Nickian ethics where he so clearly
19:34
thinks you know groups of friends these are this is you know halfway to the good life effectively um is is an insight that we
19:42
could really use. You know, everyone thinks friendship is important, right? It's very easy to say, but like culturally, we place significantly less
19:48
emphasis on friendship than almost any other point in in Western history. This is like, you know, think about um I
19:54
don't know if you you know, ever read through sort of like like letters from from the World Wars or or from like the
20:00
the Crimean Wars or or or um or you even the Polonic Wars. These are are people writing to their friends and the way
20:06
that they talk about their friends is amazing. It's more passionate passionate passionate and and sort of
20:12
vulnerable and more it's it's just very clear that friendship is a huge part of the way
20:18
that they organize their lives you know like like we you know the kind of standard way I suppose of organizing your adult life now is is to organize it
20:24
around a romantic partner and I you know I think I think there's an awful lot to be said for romance I just think that there's there's also an awful lot to be
20:30
said for friendship and it very much gets overshadowed like when was the last time or if we were to compare the amount
20:35
of great films that view that are that are about you know two people getting
20:40
together versus two great friends. I mean you know films about two great friends what like Bill and Ted you know
20:46
Harold and Kumar got the wife and yeah Harold and Kumar got the munchies you know these are I mean great films at all
20:51
but you know it's it's completely outmoded and I think I think you know that's why that's why I'm very bullish on Aristotle books eight or nine of the
20:57
Nickmackin ethics. Uhhuh. Yeah. I um I wonder what it is about stoicism. I guess just very good
21:03
PR and branding kind of suits the modern world a time when people are a little bit lost. they're unsure. It's it's it's
21:09
I've never been super attracted to it on that level. It's it's really popular as a as I guess kind of a means of of
21:16
consolation and way of sort of structuring your life. Um but I I sort of I don't know I I guess people who are
21:23
suffering are always looking for alleviation from that suffering. And traditionally it's come with a lot of metaphysical baggage. Um be that
21:30
religious or be it not. And I I suppose it offers people a way of seemingly achieving that without the metaphysical
21:36
baggage. Good news. AG1 just released their nextG formula. It is a more advanced clinically backed
21:43
version of the product that I've been drinking every day for years. So, you still get the same one scoop ritual, but now with an even more thoughtful
21:49
formulation flavor and four clinical trials behind it. AG1 has been evolving since 2010, continuously improving
21:56
alongside the latest research. And AG1 NextG is the result clinically shown to help fill common nutrient gaps and
22:02
support gut health even in people who already eat well. In one study, it boosted healthy bacteria in the gut by
22:08
10 times. And if you're still unsure, they've got a 90-day money back guarantee. So, you can buy it and try it
22:13
for three months. And if you don't like it, they'll give you your money back. Right now, you can get a year's free supply of vitamin D3, K2, and five free
22:21
AG1 travel packs, plus the 90-day money back guarantee by going to the link in the description below or heading to
22:26
drinkag.com/modernwisdom. That's drinkagg.com/modernwisdom.
Why Philosophy Can Feel a Bit Depressing
22:35
You are somebody who tried nihilism as a life philosophy. Yes, I suppose. Look, the thing
22:42
nihilism, man, it's here we go. Bull case for nihilism. Nihilism is often thought of as a
22:49
synonym for all things depressing and upsetting and in many cases it is. But
22:54
nihilism just means there's sort of no purpose to it all. There's no it's a
23:00
difficult thing to define in analytic terms. That's why it's generally in the wheelhouse of like existential philosophers who tell stories to try and
23:06
sort of grasp at a feeling. Um, but in theory, you know, if you're if it's not just that you're suffering, you could be
23:13
suffering but not be annihilist. Is if you're suffering and suffering all the more because you think you're suffering without reason. That makes you a
23:19
nihilist. But I think you could just as easily be having a wonderful time and think there is no rhyme or reason to
23:24
this. I'm having a great time, but there's absolutely no purpose to this. And you'd still be a nihilist because you think that there's no purpose behind
23:30
it all. But it doesn't mean you have to have a bad time doing so. Um, so I think it is worth if you are somebody who
23:37
wants to toy with the idea that there is no meaning. Like try it on. See how it fits. That's what you've got to do with
23:43
all philosophies. You know, if something seems like it sort of chimes with you a little bit, like live in accordance with
23:48
it for like a week and a lot of time it will be way too hard, but sometimes it will teach you something. There's a lot of memes about philosophy
23:54
making people depressed. Yeah. That the more that you learn, the worse that you see the world. What's the
24:00
darkest philosophies that you guys have been exposed to? Tran.
24:05
I I I mean I I love Tran. I think that um Tran is a Tran is incredibly underrated kind of Romanian stroke
24:11
French. Wrote lots of his work in French, but was Romanian kind of adopted France um in his in his later years.
24:18
Well, that'll make you depressed straight off the bat. Well, potentially. And uh Tran um Emil
24:23
Emil Churan. Yes. Emil Tran um writes these incredibly pessimistic uh tracks of
24:28
philosophy. You know, one's called the trouble with being born and other's called a short history of decay. And he is kind of incredibly his first book.
24:35
You sure he's not British? Well, it's it's I don't know if it's just because I'm British that it kind of I like it so much. You know, on his
24:41
first book is called On the Heights of Despair. It's, you know, truly melodramatic sanguin [ __ ] Yeah. One of the things
24:46
that I I find very interesting about about philosophies that are supposedly dark and I'm specifically thinking of the
24:51
pessimistic philosophies here, people like Shopenhau and Chan, maybe to a lesser extent someone like Philip Mainlander.
24:56
It's I know this is this is something I think Chan is so good at is that often times when you're reading him he's very
25:03
good at subtly shifting the scope. So you're reading him and you know he's complaining about about life. you know,
25:10
his his view on life is is far more pessimistic than M's view on life is this kind of the characteristic property of life is suffering for a variety of
25:17
reasons, but he occasionally just this this kind of dark pessimistic outlook
25:22
breaks through into a kind of natural light-heartedness that I think is is is absolutely amazing. So one of the things
25:28
that um one of the things that is interesting I say about reading a
25:34
pessimistic philosopher is that is that if and I think that nihilism to a certain extent shares this proed that it's kind of framed in in a certain way
25:41
is that if you know you don't you're not expecting things to go very well and if
25:46
you think the characteristic property of the of the world is meaningless suffering well then to a certain extent
25:52
like the stakes are kind of lowered. It it's sort of it's very similar I suppose to that advice that um Senica gave in
25:58
one of his letters which is to kind of imagine how things are going to go horribly wrong so that you feel much better when it
26:04
when it comes to it. Low expectations. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And um I think that on a on a kind of existential level some
26:09
reading an incredibly darkly pessimistic philosopher sort of as I say there's there is
26:15
sometimes a moment where it breaks through. I suppose the only way I could kind of try and con contextualize this is like have you ever had like an
26:21
astonishingly bad day? Just like a comedically bad day. And I do mean like comedic, you know, and you get to like 5:00 and you know you've been mugged
26:27
seven times and a car drives by and it kicks up a puddle of dog [ __ ] over your nice suit or whatever
26:34
and you can't help but just laugh because at that point it's like oh wow like this is this has become funny. And
26:41
I think that's that's something that is very very good at and that's why you know I often often talk about him as one of the darkest philosophers of all time.
26:46
He's also one of the funniest one of the few philosophers where you can read him and laugh out loud. It is hilarious that suffering is dose
26:52
dependent in that way. Like your response to it U-shaped curve it's like
26:57
too little everything's probably okay a bit oh god this sucks and then too
27:03
much it's okay again. It obviously frivolity right and and that makes it makes it liveable. I do
27:09
think sometimes the more pessimistic philosophers can be a little bit self-indulgent. It's a bit sort of, you
27:15
know, woe is me. Oh, like because, you know, I don't know, how sophisticated my thoughts, how deep
27:20
my engagement with the world is. When actually you you just like, you know, you got dumped by your girlfriend and now you're writing about how
27:27
terrible life is. I I asked Joe this the last time that we sat down. I
27:34
often think philosophy is just clever branding for depressive thoughts. It often is, but it's it's also often
27:40
just clever branding for for like any kind of thought. I think it's like you literally just have a thought and you
27:45
try to systematize it. Right? This is why the greatest philosophers, another thing we said before we started, tell
27:51
you something you already know. If you open Vickenstein's Tractus, the first line of the introduction is something
27:56
like, "I don't think this book will be useful except to anybody who's already like in agreement with the things that
28:02
it says. It's just supposed to be sort of elucidating an idea." And so, yeah, a lot of the time it is just sort of uh
28:08
feeling out a vibe, finding someone who puts it into good words and saying, "Oh, I think that person's very me. I feel
28:14
less alone." By the way, is why when people ask me for like a recommendation of what philosophy to read or something, if if someone says, you know, where should I
28:20
start with philosophy? You might be tempted to say, "Okay, well, let's start with Plato, read about Socrates and
28:26
Aristotle, then do a bit of existentialist." I just tell people just just literally read what you've heard
28:32
of. And the reason for that is because these people will have come up in contexts that are relevant to you or of
28:37
interest to you, right? So, if you've heard NZ mentioned a bunch of times because you're a big Jordan Peterson fan, like if you like Jordan Peterson,
28:43
and Jordan Peterson obviously likes nature quite a lot and finds a lot of use in him, you're probably going to find some use in him. Whereas if you just randomly pick one of the great
28:49
philosophers, like if you just pick up Sartra, as I did the other day, I told you this, and read existential is
28:55
existentialism is a humanism, and think this is complete nonsense. That was a complete waste of time because you're
29:00
not going to resonate with it. It's it's not going to strictly speaking convince you, unless I think you've already got sort of one one foot in the boat. Um I
29:08
did think on the pessimistic philosophers or you said the darkest philosophers, which doesn't necessarily mean pessimistic, right? dark
29:15
philosophy, pessimistic philosophy, what do you mean? I think Schopenhau comes to mind. He's
29:20
writing his on the sufferings of the world. That's that's your sort of indulgent pessimist. I think he had
29:25
trouble with women for some of his life and he's got this infamous essay on women, which
29:31
would read like a comedy. Um, in fact, one version of his essays I have in the introduction or the preface, the
29:37
translator says, "By the way, the essay on women isn't a joke. He's not being sarcastic. This is what he actually thought." um he comes to mind.
29:44
It's an irony disclaimer. Yeah. So, in but in order to sort of avoid that, I think that a good example of a potentially non-self-indulgent
29:51
pessimistic philosophy that seems genuinely just philosophical might be something like anti-naturalism, the view that it is immoral to have children.
29:57
David Benitar is the sort of superstar of antiism. Um he wrote a book called Better Never to Have Been, which sounds
30:03
like one of these sort of you know, I'm about to write about how terrible how terrible life is. You know, I wish I
30:09
was never born. But it's not. It's like philosophically speaking, he tries to make a case that it's just better for no one to be born, even if their life is
30:15
filled with more pleasure than suffering. He thinks that it's still immoral to bring them into existence. Um, it's an interesting it's an
30:20
interesting take. A debate about this 5 years ago in the barbcin. That sounds about right. Yeah. Yeah.
30:27
Yeah. Yeah. first met uh like canteen at the barbec and we were having the
30:33
conversation and people came tried to be social listened for 5 minutes and then left and
30:41
there was just this sort of steady cycle of people coming and going this doesn't sound very nice at all so yeah Benitar
30:47
probably does fit a good example of why you might find it dark I mean I I I call it dark if you like I mean for an antiatalist they'll
30:54
say no the the I mean the the darkness is that you're you unconventionally bringing people into suffering. You
30:59
know, that's representation of but in terms of how it's perceived, I think that um as far as pessimism goes,
31:04
the idea that it's immoral to have children. I mean, you've heard of like the pro-life and the the pro-choice
31:11
crowd. Benitar and his crew are like anti-life, you know, like it's like this sort of third option that everybody
31:17
forgets about. He um he's got some wonderful sort of little tidbits in there. He he takes a divergence into the
31:23
into the philosophy of disability for a time sort of making a case that in principle we are all disabled in some
31:29
philosophical sense. Are we all disabled? It's been a while since I've read it but I think he sort of imagined so so one way of thinking about this would be like
31:36
imagine if everybody whose legs worked suddenly just died and
31:41
the only people left on planet Earth like don't have functioning legs. Maybe not instantly because people would have
31:47
memory, but after not very long, it just wouldn't be considered a disability to not have legs because that's just how
31:52
everybody is. And Benar sort of imagines in principle the things that we could have that we don't, which means that in
31:58
principle we are disabled in the same way. We just can't. So there exactly. So there are all kinds of sufferings that come about in our life like having to
32:03
climb the stairs, which we don't even notice as sufferings. And if you add all of these up, they become pretty significant. It's a it's a bit of a
32:09
trip. Um, but really interesting and and I think probably probably dark. The
32:15
other thing that reason that's quite nice about Benitar, I said it was sort of dry earlier and I did mean that as a compliment. Sorry. Is that you like
32:22
frilly? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Is that Benitar is is very he gives a very logical argument as
32:29
in you know there there I would say there are problems with the argument but you know as in like it's very clearly laid out in a way that quite a lot of
32:34
pessimistic philosophers write in sort of semi- poetry. Um, Benitar, if you if you're a hardcore analytic fan, he's
32:39
probably seems that way. I suppose he also You spoke to him, right? I did. I had him on my show. Um, he
32:46
doesn't show his face. Yeah, he he doesn't I I I I actually don't know if he uses his real name. Um, but he
32:51
doesn't show his face. So, there is also that added element that you you he doesn't want to be seen, you know.
32:56
Oh, so he's the sleep token of the philosophy world. Oh, are they the the maskw wearing slip
33:02
knot? Joe, don't make that face up. No, no, no. Sorry. I know it's I I don't think that it's very very cool, very
33:08
popular about this. You know, like you know when you guys start telling me about you know anesthetus of ancient city and I go, "Oh yeah, yeah, yeah."
33:15
And I need to nod along like this. This is your turn. Oh yeah. Okay, there we are. Thank you. Very good. What's the philosophy of sleep token?
33:21
Um if you go on the Reddit really deep, really really really deep. The law goes
33:28
hard. The law goes hard on on many subreddits. I have a subreddit to which which has some interesting laws of it I
33:35
think. Yeah. Yeah. I've seen them. Yeah. You're you've got cannon. Yeah. Apparently. Apparently. Apparently. So,
33:40
um Okay. So, Benitar's got this I remember you
Is Life Worth Living?
33:46
his whole thing is this balance between suffering and pleasure. Yeah. Is that even a a tiny microcosm of suffering is so
33:54
great that it doesn't it outweighs any amount of pleasure. You call it like an asymmetry argument between pleasure and pain. So a lot
34:01
I've just pulled that out of a five five and a halfyear-old canteen convers
34:08
a great advert for a tasty drink with zero calories wisdom I don't know what is come on
34:14
and he remembers um it's I think when a lot of people would consider is life worth living one crude way of working it
34:21
out is adding up the pleasure minusing the pain and sort of seeing what you're left over with you know is it is it worth living overall Bener thinks that
34:30
crucially before you exist. The potential pleasure that you might
34:35
experience if you come into existence doesn't matter one like one job. It's literally irrelevant. But the potential
34:40
pain that you would avoid does matter. And he tries to prove this through some
34:46
sort of intuitive thought experiments. For example, there are no conscious beings on Mars, right? We don't really
34:54
think that it's a bad thing that all this pleasure that could be on Mars is
34:59
is being missed out on. We don't think what a tragedy that all of the potential pleasure that could exist on Mars isn't
35:05
actually happening. But we might think that it is a good thing that there's no suffering up there. And some people hear
35:12
that kind of example and go, "Yeah, that makes sense." Some people go, "Well, no, I am I am sad that there's no pleasure
35:17
on it." It's sort of an intuitive thing. Um he also one other way of thinking about this at
35:23
least for the imbalance might be a question which is would you take 5
35:28
minutes of the worst imaginable conceivable suffering that you could experience if afterwards you got to have
35:34
5 minutes of the best possible bliss. I mean I don't know what you guys would do. You wouldn't take it?
35:39
No thank you. I I think that's I don't think I'd take 5 minutes of the best possible bliss anyway the rest of your life because the
35:44
rest of your life would you just expectation Yeah. You just you'll just be completely you just feel empty, you know. I mean that's another asymmetry.
35:51
Yeah, that's an additional asymmetry. And that that actually might be just a a sort of good response to this kind of
35:57
thought experiment because what uh Bennett is trying to say is that most people would say no and so crudely it
36:03
seems like the suffering kind of counts for more. Um but as so much of philosophy does it kind of relies on
36:09
intuitive your sort of feeling of have a sense of negativity bias and loss of another way he he talks about and
36:14
crucially this is only before you exist right once you exist your your pleasure is good for you and your suffering is
36:19
bad for you but before you exist other people have a choice about whether you do or don't. before you ex for
36:25
someone who doesn't exist then not experiencing pleasure is not bad but then not experiencing suffering is good
36:32
and so before you're born the only moral calculus is the goodness that you're not suffering and so that's all that should
36:39
be taken into account it's good that you're not suffering let's not bring that into existence another sort of line of reasoning he goes down is a kind of
36:45
like a rights based approach where he says suppose for example that if I were
36:51
to like break your arm you would get an ins encyclopedic knowledge of philosophy
36:57
or something. You might, if I gave you that option, you might think to yourself like, you know what, I think that's that's worth it. Probably definitely be worth it for
37:02
me. I'd take that. However, even if I would actually prefer that, if you didn't ask me first, if you just
37:09
did it, like, you don't have the right to do that to me, right? If if I found
37:14
you in need of an ambulance and the only way to save your life somehow was to break your arm, then I think most people
37:20
say you should do it. But if by causing you suffering, I can not save you from worse suffering, but bring you something
37:26
good, most people think that I don't have the right to inflict that suffering on you, even if it would be ultimately worth it. So for Benitar, same thing
37:32
before you're born, right? You're allowed to inflict suffering to prevent worse suffering, but you're not allowed to inflict suffering on the
37:40
promise that there'll be some good that comes out of it unconsensually. Because what you're essentially doing is is causing a bunch of people to
37:46
unconsensually experience masses of suffering that they had no say in. Some people have actually tried to sue their
37:52
parents for wrongful birth because they that's actually that has actually happened if you're Benitar pilled. Yeah. Exactly. So the the asymmetry
37:59
thing is is quite important to Benitar's flavor of antiatalism. You can have antiatalism without it. You can just say
38:04
that life consists in more suffering. And if you think it's it's consists in more pleasure, you you've fallen for the
38:11
uh the polyiana principle as I think they call it, which is the idea that we tend to remember the good stuff more
38:16
than the bad stuff. The sort of rosetinted view of of the past. Most people, says Benitar,
38:22
like vastly underestimate the extent to which their lives are going terribly. They they like sort of in retrospect
38:27
think, oh, you know, it's all good, but if you actually were to live through it again, you'd realize that at every moment it was going very badly. He then after after convinc after convincing you
38:35
that you're he sort of he sort of says like you know it doesn't matter how much you suffer or or experience pleasure in
38:41
life it's immoral to bring people into existence and then after convincing you of that he then says but just so you
38:46
know life is actually does actually contain a lot more suffering and this uh detour into disability ethics or
38:53
metaphysics I suppose is sort of part of this case you know these these menial
38:58
sufferings that that you don't even notice It's not you shouldn't have been here.
39:04
You should be upset that you are here and by the way the fact that you are here also is a reason for regret. Yeah, it gets a little bit tricky
39:10
because like once you're here I mean the the inevitable question for Benar is is then why don't you just think we should
39:16
kill ourselves and David Benar in a footnote compares this to going to a movie and when you're about halfway
39:23
through thinking like this is kind of a crap film. um it's not bad enough that
39:28
I'm going to leave now that I'm here, but I kind of wish I'd never come in the first place. That's sort of his position
39:34
on on on life. He's he's he's How robust do you think that is as an answer to why shouldn't I just kill myself? I think it it doesn't really work very
39:42
well cuz I'm quite suspicious of the the asymmetry argument like anyway. Um so I think that a case that that sort of
39:49
makes life not worth living and therefore not worth beginning will inevitably create a powerful argument
39:55
for not continuing life. Um, Bener like is, as far as I can remember, quite
40:00
quite sort of staunchly not that. Um, but I I'm not so sure that they can be
40:07
so definitively separated. Has someone taken that? Is there a suicide cult philosophy?
40:14
There have been examples. I think Kimu talks about a few examples at the beginning of the myth of Sephus, doesn't
40:19
he? He sort of he sort of mentions I think like one or two examples of some philosophers who like rode a track. He
40:24
he mention I can't remember who it was. He mentions who wrote a track and then killed himself in order to like bring attention to his work, but it didn't
40:30
work cuz no one liked the work anyway. Philip Mainlander killed himself, but I don't know if that I I can't remember if that's what he's talking about.
40:35
I can't remember who who Kimu is talking about. Um, but no, you tend to find that people who are genuinely committed. I
40:41
mean, Kimu says in the myth of Sophus, for the man who does not cheat, what he determines to be true must determine his
40:46
action. So, if you become convinced that life is not worth living and you're like certain enough of that in order to kill
40:52
yourself, then you're probably not going to sit around writing a book first. So it's it's sort of like self- selecting.
40:58
There's an interesting sort of evolutionary deselection for views like this and for views like antiatalism and
41:03
and again mentor addresses this doesn't affect the truth of the claim but it means it will never take off because
41:08
it's cancerous. Exactly. Yeah. Which in reverse is the explanation I think for the general
41:15
optimism that sort of sort of just just only the optimistic throughout exactly to some degree. I
41:22
mean, there are people who are not optimists, but they're not quite pessimistic enough to to fully commit to the bit, as it were. Um, and if they
41:28
are, then they select themselves out of the meme pool. If you haven't been feeling as sharp or energized as you'd like, getting your
41:33
blood work done is the best place to start, which is why I partnered with Function. They run lab tests twice a
41:39
year that monitor over 100 biomarkers. They've got a team of expert physicians that take the data, put it in a simple
41:45
dashboard, and give you actionable insights and recommendations to improve your health and lifespan. They track
41:51
everything from your heart health to your hormone levels to your thyroid function and nutrient deficiencies. They even screen for 50 types of cancer at
41:58
stage one, which is five times more data than you get from an annual physical. And getting your blood work done and drawn and analyzed like this would
42:04
usually cost thousands, but with function it is only $499. And right now they're giving a,000 Modern Wisdom
42:10
listeners another $100 off, bringing it down to $399. So just go to the link in
42:15
the description below or head to functionhealth.com/modwisdom. functionhealth.com/modernwisdom.
42:22
I had a conversation with a gentleman who his entire theory of human
42:28
evolution, human cultural evolution is that human culture is almost expressly
42:34
built around helping people to not take their own lives and that our system is too. And we got halfway through the
42:40
episode and uh he it's the only time this has ever happened. he bailed out of the episode partway through was had had
42:46
a bad night's sleep and wasn't he felt like he wasn't making it. And I thought, well, that's kind of on brand for somebody who had this sort of a
42:53
worldview that everything is about avoiding things going badly that partway through an episode about it, he decided
42:59
that it was going so badly that he didn't want to continue. Yeah. Yeah. Um, another thing Kimu says is that the meaning of life is literally
43:06
whatever is keeping you from killing yourself. Yes. You know, and I think that's that's more or less true. Um,
43:13
yeah. Why don't you kill yourself? Yeah. And I think that there are mo most people who engage with that topic do so
43:22
on an emotional level. And that's the that's the motivation for these kinds of thoughts. There are people who are just like intellectually interested in in the
43:28
worthiness of life, like whether it's worth living. But that very rarely is actually what's what's going on, I
43:33
think, when when people are seriously struggling with this. And so, I don't know, it makes it a sort of difficult
43:39
philosophical terrain. But I think that people who are just interested in it intellectually often will appreciate
43:45
someone who can just forthrightly discuss it. You know, because a lot of the time it's like, you know, you you open a open a a
43:52
YouTube video that's going to discuss abstractly the philosophy of suicide and it opens with a helpline. It's like way to give away your position. You know,
43:58
like it's I think people will like like ideological bias in the suicide
44:04
discussion because but people I think people want to feel like they're being taken seriously, right? And if if you if you come with a with a with a
44:10
philosophical or emotional conviction to the table and someone before you even get started says, "Hey, just so you know, like you know, we're going to
44:15
we're going to move towards this direction, I think I think a lot of people would appreciate like a a
44:21
forthright direct approach, which is why so many people are attracted to the myth of Sephus by Kimu because it sort of
44:26
it's starkly opens with that um you know there is but one serious philosophical
44:32
question and that is suicide." Um, and it captures a lot of people's attention because even people who aren't feeling
44:37
suicidal are like, "Whoa, yeah, that's interesting." You know, and they they just want to read about it in a in a in
44:42
a relatively straightforward way. I unfortunately think it's pretty overhyped, the myth of Seisphus. Why Why do you not like the myth of
Why Context Matters in Understanding Philosophers
44:48
Seisphus? I I I sort of I don't have an aversion to existentialist philosophy sort of
44:56
generally, but it it sort of doesn't really capture me. Like I think that I
45:02
don't know. I mean, I don't know if Kimu like sufficiently answers the question. His his famous conclusion is imagining
45:09
Sisphus happy, right? And I just I don't know if that's like a satisfying thought to me. For some it might be, but but for
45:15
me it's it's not. It's just as as meaningless as the situation that we that we began with, you know, this this
45:20
sort of happy pushing of the boulder. Um I don't know. Joe, you can probably make a case. Is there a a bull case for
45:30
well just imagine this thing to be different? Just play pretend until you believe
45:35
it's like an act of rebellion for for Kamu. It's like a it's almost like an existential irony, right? Like he's sort of you're just going to
45:42
like enjoy the thing. Well, it's interesting because I I find the development of Kimu's thought over time very interesting for this because the
45:48
myth of Cisphus is often, you know, the thing that people take away is of course, you know, imagining Sisphus
45:54
happy. It's such a such a famous image, but a lot of the myth of Seisphus
46:00
is significantly more I don't know what the right word is like more intuitively abhorrent than that if
46:07
that makes sense. And even to Kamu. So Kamu writes a myth of Cisphus. He paints a bunch of characters who are meant to
46:12
be like absurd men and some of them are like really awful people, you know, like like kind of philanderas or, you know,
46:18
one of them is kind of, you know, the actor who never becomes themselves and is just playing characters all the time. And
46:24
there and he has this idea of like, okay, well, if you're an absurdist and
46:30
you are you think there's no objective or or you know, no way to say that that one aspect of life is better than any
46:36
other. You're kind of trying to live out valuelessness. Well, then in that case, Kamu thinks, well, if you decided not to
46:41
kill yourself, the only value that you're at least enacting is that life is better than no life. And so, you should
46:47
value the quantity of life over the quality of life. Now, of course, although that's not existential nihilism, that's pretty close to moral
46:53
nihilism. And Kamu clearly is troubled by this because one of the next things he writes is a play called Caligula,
46:59
which is all about the Roman emperor, a kind of fictionalized version of the Roman Emperor, Caligula, going absolutely batshit and killing lots of
47:06
people. And you know there there are various analyses you can make of this. When I um read that I think yeah this is
47:13
Kamu wrestling with his own philosophy and he's got he's painted himself into a corner whereby you can only value the
47:18
quantity of life and not the quality of life. And then he's teasing out some of the the consequence of that and he's
47:24
clearly not happy because he then writes books that are ostensibly attempting to go no hang on a sec. We can't there are
47:31
there are further things that we can do with with absurdism that that wasn't definitive. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And we just, you know,
47:37
the myth of Sisphus is is one of the first things that Camu writes along with the the stranger.
47:42
Oh, it's the difficult first album of of the outsider
47:47
and and it's it's and it is, you know, I I've I like the mythosis partly because it's so counterintuitive, but some of
47:53
his later works, things like The Plague, The Plague is an amazing novel. It sort of is it it became like a bestseller for
47:59
obvious reasons. It's about a kind of a plague hitting the the town of Iran in
48:05
um I think it's you know in French Algeria what was then French Algeria and how people cope with that and it's you
48:12
know the people have given various different analogical readings for this. So um one is to read it as an analogy
48:18
for the Nazi occupation of France. Um, another is to but but but part of the
48:23
the a kind of tying this back to the development of Kamu's thought from the myth of Cisphus. One way of looking at
48:29
it is to say well these are lots of things that Kamu thinks when the chips are down people turn to. One of them is
48:35
friendship. I'm very bullish on friendship generally but um you know another one is kind of this kind of shared struggle. There there are bits in
48:41
the in the plague where they sort of say, "Okay, yeah, we're fighting a kind
48:46
of nonipotent disease, but what what we're going to fight it because that's
48:52
the way that we're coping almost, you know, in in a in a time of of kind of abhorentt struggle and people are dying
48:59
around them all." Feels like the human centipede of philosophical arguments a little bit. Yeah. as in like as in it's it's and so you know and then Kamu
49:05
writes the rebel which is one of his one of his later um works which is again discussing you know what can an
49:10
absurdist coherently value without simply falling back onto a kind of leap of faith or something and I I really
49:16
like those later works. I'm not convinced that they actually are consistent with this earlier position he has of like kind of hardcore absurdism,
49:23
but I do think they're still they're still worth reading. I think this is actually like understated in a great deal of like philosophers who are now
49:30
dead is like what they thought as if they just like like lived for one year
49:36
wrote everything down and stayed the same you know like we sort of we we forget that people like you know if
49:41
you've ever thought about writing a book and I'm sure we all at this table probably have at some point one of the thoughts you have is like you know am I
49:47
am I ready you know is this the right time because you recognize that whatever you write now in 20 years at least some
49:53
of it you're going to want to revive eyes or you're going to have changed your mind about and you're also going to have to answer to.
49:58
Exactly. And it's, you know, you're going to have your your name in a bookstore and you have to grimace every time you walk past it. I would probably
50:04
be driven mad. I'd like pull it off the shelf and scribble out the the paragraphs by by hand, you know. Um,
50:11
and this is is what humans do, right? And so when we talk about what Kamu
50:16
thought as if his life was actually just that day when he finally said, "And
50:23
done." Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Like he's just had a he's just had a fantastically bad day and the car is just and he thought, you
50:29
know what, [ __ ] it. You know, yeah. Like David Hume writes the the what's the
50:34
first one? The treaties concerning human nature and it's like this does he spell human
50:40
with with an E. That would have been [ __ ] brilliant. It would have been would have been properly bad.
50:46
Well, he didn't know much about PR because the book didn't sell. And he later sort of revises his thoughts into
50:51
the much shorter inquiry concerning human understanding. the same kind of thoughts revisited and it's posited as
50:57
like a sort of like an update and he tells people not to read the other one but some people think it's just because the first one kind of wasn't selling and
51:03
in fact when I went to university they made us study the treaties because it's more like fleshed out but he literally
51:09
like writes the kind of same thing again in different form later in his life and so there is always sort of development
51:16
of thought with philosophers and we only tend to be aware of it when it's grand and dramatic when someone converts from
51:22
one side to another when Anthony Flu becomes a theist or something but it it happens throughout the history of
51:28
thought too. So like when you're reading a text by somebody like if you're interested in their thought like try to
51:34
keep in mind some chronology of like when it was when it was written because
51:39
otherwise you might be reading you know the Goblet of Fire before you read the Chamber of Secrets and you're probably going to get the wrong kind of idea.
51:45
Sorry no I was good. Even even someone like Plato who we quite often think of as having a a very strong stable
51:52
consistent set of made out of marble well as he if you if you you know is one
51:57
of his earlier works which is both a kind of political treatise but also a theory of the human mind is called the republic and then later he writes a book
52:05
that's also a political work called the laws and you can see the development of his thoughts in the republic he's very
52:10
focused on what makes a good ruler and in the laws he's very focused on okay he he'd had a quite a disillusioning
52:16
experience with a a tyrant called um Dianisis I think. Cool. Yeah. Um in in
52:22
Syracuse where he tried to Dianis had invited him over um twice actually and
52:27
both times it went terribly and said, "Yeah, yeah, like I'm really interested in being in being like a one
52:33
of your like philosopher kings. Yeah, like this sounds really cool. You can help me rule better." And then he shows up and and Dian Isis is just like
52:39
drinking himself silly and um and and Plato was like look like one of the really big things about being a kind of
52:45
philosopher king is like temperance and and and and you know not gorging yourself and kind of staying cuz other
52:50
how are you going to make like really good decisions if you're drunk all the time and Dianisis kind of goes look I'm going to stop you right there like you
52:56
don't understand I'm I'm in charge and like you do what I say. It's very unplay
53:02
and he basically kind of imprisons Plato for a bit and he eventually gets free and then he goes back and same thing happens and he flees and disillusioned
53:09
by this. Plato writes the laws which are much less concerned with what makes a good ruler and are much more concerned
53:14
with if you know rulers come and go. How are you going to keep everyone in check? These philosophers often have like
53:19
extraordinary lives. Why does Thomas Hobbes write the Leviathan? Because he had to flee him being a royalist during
53:26
the English Civil War. he has to flee to to France because of the English civil war and he writes this tract about how
53:32
we should all submit to a to authoritarian dictator essentially and there should be that who should be able to dictate
53:38
everything with full submission including religious affairs. You got to be aware not only the chronology but
53:43
also the the context personal motivation and also one other thing on this thread is be aware that sometimes when you're
53:50
reading people they're kind of they're writing under the laws of a country. Dosstofki, his notes from the
53:55
underground, one of the most famous of his books because it's it's so short and easy to read, uh, originally contained a
54:01
chapter which essentially argued for the necessity of Christianity as Joski saw it, but it was censored and and taken
54:07
out and so you end up with this sort of quite fully nihilistic tract. Um, but I
54:13
think a lot of that is also going on historically too. So, so be aware that you know these are human beings with
54:20
developing thoughts and political considerations inspiring their writing. When it comes to history of thought, is
Why is There Growing Interest in Panpsychism?
54:26
there someone that you think changed thinking forever but was sort of useless
54:31
in practice? Like someone who contributed to moving thought forward most without having any real life
54:37
applicability? That's a tricky question. I'm I'm tempted to say in a non-insulting way theologians only because
54:45
only because Like obviously if you're a believer in God, the nature of God will will greatly
54:50
affect some practical things in your life. The way that you worship, you know, should you worship the saints or not? Are you worshiping a a tripartite,
54:58
you know, God or or a singular unity? You know, that kind of stuff will be important to your daily practice. But if
55:03
you're talking about in practice like for society as it were, then it's probably not particularly relevant to
55:10
anyone who doesn't care about that kind of stuff. So that that sort of springs to mind. Um but out outside of that, I
55:18
don't know. Um maybe some of the more abstract I name that actually sprung to mind was Bertrand Russell, which you
55:23
might jump down my throat for, but was he actually a practical philosopher? Everything he tried to write in practice
55:29
was was awful. It Bert Russell was very I suppose it depends what you mean by practical. B Russell was very important um in the
55:34
kind of history of studies of the foundations of mathematics and stuff like that. And although his uh you wrote
55:40
a three volume insane project um is it
55:45
two or three volumes? I always get too confused. No, no, nobody's read the whole thing. This is like because it's it's deeply impenetrable. It takes like
55:51
what 300 pages to prove that one ad one is two. Yes. I it might Yeah, it's it's some it's between it's like I think around
55:57
the 200 page mark which is quite a thing to do from first principles. It's a real battle of attrition. It's difficult. Yeah. Yeah. But you know, but
56:02
um so that's like the terms and conditions of philosophy. It's like no one actually reads it, but you kind of you kind of need it to be there because it's it's
56:08
important. And he he writes that with um Alfred North Whitehead and uh that that that's that's very
56:14
influential, you know, that it's it in even though the grand project failed, there were some operators they coined
56:19
that are very important. Um things like uh there exists a unique object such that which is is is now very help
56:25
helpful in areas of maths. So you know not not not not kind of helpful on an everyday level but a lot a lot of
56:30
Russell's um academic writing is is very much um in philosophy of language philosophy of maths foundations of
56:36
foundations of mathematics logic you know the which I think are very handy but um you know
56:42
it's not necessarily like you're going to read his theory of descriptions and then just be out and about being like oh yeah like
56:47
my life is so much better. Okay. So, I guess even broader than that, are there some branches of philosophy that should
56:53
be just jettisoned entirely? Any uh bits that are just intellectual cosplay
56:59
deadends? No, because philosophy, if you find a philosophy
57:04
useful, then it is useful. Um, like that's that's kind of what it's what it's there. It's like it's like asking the question
57:09
of of sort of, you know, are there any like music genres that you think should should should get in the bin? And the
57:15
answer is like no, because somebody's enjoying that, right? like I I'm sure it's useful to somebody. Um but you
57:20
know, if we had to get rid of one of them, I I don't know. Um maybe pure logic puzzles, philosophy of mind.
57:28
Philosophy of mind is is way too important. A philosophy of mind is the next big thing. You know, I like it's excruciatingly boring for a lot of
57:34
people. I mean, we've talked about how it's quite difficult to to to talk about it in a concrete way that no one on YouTube likes and I can't work
57:40
out whether it's because it's hard or because it's pointless. You know, my my audience have quite taken to the philosophy of mind. I think
57:47
because I have too and so I've got this like enthusiasm for it. I think it's really important and I think like watch sell me sell me on philosophy.
57:52
Watch this space as it were. I think sell me on it. People are beginning to realize that consciousness it's always been like you
57:58
know you'll have someone and they'll say like consciousness it's just such a mystery and like you know it's like trying to view the window pane through
58:04
the window pane because we experience the whole world through that's that's interesting but everybody kind of already knows that that's why we're at
58:09
the table having the conversation. Um there is a there is a stark increase
58:14
happening in the view that consciousness is so to speak fundamental. Here's the
58:19
interesting thing. Yeah. So panzikism right and here's one interesting observation which is that there are these cliches that crop up basically
58:26
everywhere you look. Right. If you look at ancient um vadic literature. If you
58:32
look uh at a meditative monk who
58:37
achieves enlightenment in the forest somewhere. If you look at Joe Blogs who
58:43
took LSD last week and had like this insane experience at the peak of his hero dose, they will say similar things
58:50
which is this sort of cliche of everything is one. I am one with the universe, the ego death, the
58:56
disillusion. Exactly. And this kind of stuff has been has been present in in in
59:02
these philosophical traditions like from from the beginning of history. The prescratics talk about it a little bit
59:08
too. Um, and I think that we're beginning like people are beginning to
59:14
become much more open to the idea that there is something true about that and there's a reason why that keeps coming about. Um, pansychism is is growing in
59:22
popularity because the problem is like we believe that there is a world of matter and we know that we are conscious
59:29
and you've got a few options available to you. Either the consciousness is like a totally separate thing from the material which makes it seem really
59:35
weird. Why does it interact with me? If consciousness is literally immaterial, if it's not made of of matter that like
59:40
my brain and my body is, then it is a complete mystery how it would interact with my physical body. Like it's not
59:47
like it's floating around out there. It has no spatial dimension. It's not it's not material. It's another piece of matter that is not matter. Must be some other kind of
59:53
matter. The the like it is as mysterious that that that my mind would interact with my brain as it is as it would be if my mind
1:00:01
suddenly started interacting with your brain or with that can of tasty new tonic on the table. Like it would just be like what what are you talking about?
1:00:07
The if these are two separate kinds of things you're talking about like taking the number two adding in a chair and
1:00:15
like getting you know the color orange just like just categories of different things that seem like they shouldn't be
1:00:21
able to interact. Okay. So then maybe the mind is just made out of material. But then you run into some intuitive
1:00:27
problems about the the nature of thoughts. You know, people keep coming at me because I like to sort of froth at
1:00:33
the mouth over the thought of closing my eyes and imagining a triangle and asking where on earth that triangle is. There are true facts about that triangle. It's
1:00:40
got three sides, right? That's true. It's really like I can see it in my head. It's true that it's got three sides,
1:00:45
but where is that triangle? It's not just made up of the matter of my brain. If I cut open your brain, I'm not going to find a triangle in there. It it's you
1:00:52
can sort of find the the material activity that's correlated with the experience of the triangle. That's not
1:00:58
the same thing as the triangle. So you've sort of got this this sort of barrier problem of where you get from
1:01:03
this material stuff to this non-material stuff. And the pansychist says there is no barrier. But instead of saying
1:01:09
everything's made out of material and so is consciousness, they just say that everything is consciousness from the
1:01:14
get-go and therefore you get consciousness. The biggest myth for the
1:01:19
pansychist and other related schools in consciousness is that complexity is
1:01:26
required for consciousness. That might be the big myth that needs to
1:01:32
dissipate. Is their argument that because the brain is the most complex thing we know, it's the one that's got the most consciousness.
1:01:37
It's got it the things that we think consciousness is are actually sometimes
1:01:43
just what consciousness does. Okay, let me let me I'll explain it this way. Right. So So if consciousness just means
1:01:50
like some kind of experience, some kind of awareness, right?
1:01:56
When we talk about what makes somebody conscious, we might talk about things like memory,
1:02:03
first person conscious experience, awareness, these kinds of things. But like rudimentary consciousness on its
1:02:10
own wouldn't necessarily require any of those things. Imagine for a moment that you had no memory.
1:02:16
I don't mean like you forget what happened yesterday like you've got dementia. I mean literally no memory
1:02:21
laid down in any instant. What would that be like? It's kind of impossible to imagine. Imagine you were falling
1:02:26
through the air and no memory was being laid down at any instant. Would you even know that you were falling?
1:02:32
You'd have no sort of instant before to compare yourself with. You wouldn't even know that you were a being. You wouldn't
1:02:38
know that your feet are part of you. You wouldn't have there's no time for that to happen. You would literally like it's impossible to even conceive of what
1:02:44
the content of your thoughts would be. They would be the simplest possible thing that consciousness could experience.
1:02:50
And yet it would still be conscious and aware. And so this this like the laying
1:02:56
down of memory is something that consciousness can do which gives rise to more complex conscious behaviors like
1:03:02
our conversations and and me knowing that you know we're in a building and that this is a microphone and that kind
1:03:07
of stuff. But that is not consciousness. That's just one thing that consciousness does when it's complexely arranged in
1:03:13
the same so when we look at like a a rock and say there's no consciousness and look at a brain and say there is and
1:03:19
it's because oh the brain is complicated. The pansyist says, "No, consciousness is at the foundation of all of it. You've just got more
1:03:24
complicated consciousness which does things like memory and self-awareness and communication. And you've got less
1:03:30
complex consciousness which just sort of at the atomic level just sits there and sort of fizzes around." Right? The
1:03:36
analogy I sometimes give to explain this is imagine comparing the rock to the Empire State Building. And we said, "Look at the Empire State Building with
1:03:42
its complexity, with it with its elevators and and cash machines and it's
1:03:47
got like light switches and electricity and and you kind of think it's this it's it can't be made of matter, you know,
1:03:54
cuz like a rock is made of matter." No, it is still made of matter. It's just arranged in a more complex way and so doing much more interesting things. And
1:04:00
our brains are like the empire building of fundamental consciousness which is you arrange it in a particular way and
1:04:06
suddenly it can do all these magical things like conversations and talk to each other. But the pansyus thinks that at root it's
1:04:12
it's consciousness. Before we continue, if your sleep's not right, you're taking ages to nod off waking up at random
1:04:18
times and feeling groggy in the morning. Momentus' sleep hacks are here to help. They're not your typical knock you out
1:04:23
supplement overloaded with melatonin. Just the most evidence-based ingredient at perfect doses to help you fall asleep
1:04:29
more quickly, stay asleep throughout the night, and wake up feeling more rested and revitalized in the morning. I'm banking on you not being able to hit me.
1:04:36
That's why I take these every single night, especially when I'm on the road, and why I trust Menus with my life. All right. Okay, there we go. Or at least my
1:04:42
sleep because they make the highest quality supplements on the planet. What you see in the on the label is what's in
1:04:48
the product and absolutely nothing else. And if you're still unsure, they've got a 30-day money back guarantee. So you
1:04:53
can buy it and try it every night for 29 nights. 30 nights in fact. And if you
1:05:00
don't like it for any reason, they will give you your money back. That's how confident they are that you'll love it. Plus they ship internationally. Right
1:05:07
now you can get 35%. He's run out of ammo. Right now, you can get 35% off your first subscription and
1:05:13
that 30-day money back guarantee by heading to live momentous.com/martwisdom
1:05:22
code modernwisdom at checkout. That's lie mus.com/modern
1:05:31
wisdom and modern wisdom at checkout.
1:05:39
What do you make of pansyism, Joe? I I I like it in the sense that I I
1:05:44
think that it's kind of satisfyingly empirical, which sounds very a very strange thing to say. Um but, you know,
1:05:50
ultimately it's somebody saying, "Okay, we've got um matter and mind. It's very difficult to reduce mind to matter. We
1:05:56
can't deny that mind exists because it is in some sense the precondition for thinking that everything else exists."
1:06:02
And so, right, if we can't reduce the two, we'll just have to make mind, you know, and matter play together.
1:06:08
So, I'm I'm sympathetic in that sense. I think that I think that um for me, the aspect of
1:06:15
the pansyist approach that will probably need to be worked out in more detailed. Somebody probably has cuz I'm not that well read regarding pansychism is a kind
1:06:22
of detailed account of what complexity amounts to. M so like you know for example you know the we we can arrange
1:06:29
the brain in you know we we have brains they're arranged in a certain way you can arrange you know a series of rocks
1:06:35
in that way you could try and simulate it with a kind of similar aspects of the mind with a binary gate system stuff
1:06:40
like that like in what I think that that that kind of I worry that sometimes
1:06:48
a lot of the work is then being thrown at this notion of complexity and that I sometimes think that the plausibility of
1:06:53
the pansychist program is going to rest on how that idea of complexity is cached out. This may just be um however a
1:07:01
neurological or a neuroscientific problem. There's a guy called neuroscientist called Fran either
1:07:06
Franchiscoco or Francisco I don't know Francisco Varela who um his whole project is okay I want to try and
1:07:12
contribute to to the hard to solving the hard problem of consciousness which is the idea of you know bridging the gap
1:07:18
between the material world and felt experience and so he's going to try and do that by and has been trying to do
1:07:24
that by charting as many possible neurological coralates as you can between phenomenologically reported
1:07:31
experience and stuff going on in the brain. And that's his whole and he just kind of and I I have a lot of I have a
1:07:37
lot of sympathy for that. Um partly because I think that you know no matter what your philosophical stance is, you're clearly going to have to deal
1:07:43
with these findings. You know this whether you think as Varela does that this will actually allow you to bridge the hard problem of consciousness
1:07:49
eventually and that you'll be able to reduce mind to matter or whether you're a pansychist and this will help you with
1:07:54
your fleshing out your account of complexity. I think that you know this is one of the reasons why the philosophy
1:08:00
of mind I think is is is in such a boom period academic wise is because it's I
1:08:07
often think that philosophy is most helpful when it's interdisciplinary. Um I really like for example the
1:08:12
intersection between philosophy and linguistics because I I think that there's a real strength in in taking
1:08:17
empirical results from linguistics and empirical results from neuroscience and from psychology and looking at it through a philosophical lens. you know
1:08:24
trying to you know in very broad terms I suppose trying to see what it means and then applying it to different things you know this is I I think that a lot of the
1:08:30
best philosophy work occurs at the intersection of philosophy in different fields and specifically I think philosophy and neuroscience is a very
1:08:37
promising one I think I think there's a lot of very good work being done there what else is like it felt to me uh
Is Consciousness Unified?
1:08:45
when I say I started learning about pansychism who's the dude from Durham University Philip Goff thank you so Philip is the first guy I had an entire
1:08:52
conversation with about that was on his first book 2019. Yeah. Galileo's era one
1:08:59
so that was it. But I before then I'd sort of seen it had a bit of an understanding about what it was.
1:09:05
Uh Anukica has done two books on it now. I think something like that. Was she she Anukica the way she conveyed
1:09:12
it to me was like the only conclusion I can draw from my interviews on on consciousness is that I
1:09:19
have to take seriously the idea that consciousness is fundamental. not quite sure what that means. And it sounds like
1:09:24
it's sort of theic of the theory of mind one. Yeah. And she's she's totally materialistic and and she's like, "Look,
1:09:29
I it sounds totally insane, but but bear with me." And she does this like, you know, 12-part documentary interviewing all these people and thinking actually
1:09:35
there is something very very strange going on. The biggest problem for pansychism is the so-called combination problem. That's like the actual biggest critique
1:09:41
that a pansyist would recognize, which is crucially pansychists don't really think
1:09:47
that like everything is conscious. They don't necessarily think this can is conscious as a unified entity.
1:09:53
They think that it's made out of consciousness. The consciousness is the stuff of the universe out of which things are made.
1:09:59
Um you know like calling this a can. This is an artifact. We've put this together as human beings. We've taken materials and arranged them. So it's
1:10:06
like there's nothing to say that it would get this unified center of consciousness. That would be kind of weird, right? If we took a bunch of
1:10:11
consciousness and just put it together in this shape and suddenly it had a unified sense of consciousness. That would be strange. But that's what
1:10:17
happens in the brain according to the panyist. Right. So it's like if one person is in a field and ton of other people are in
1:10:24
different fields and then you put them all together in the same field and somehow one brain. Exactly. Like why why does my why does my consciousness if my
1:10:31
brain is made up of consciousness? Then why when it's arranged in a particular way do I get this singular unified sense
1:10:36
of of self? And why is it not that like all three of our brains have a singular sense of consciousness? And if we got
1:10:43
close enough together, which we're not going to do, uh then it would happen. They call it the combination problem
1:10:48
because it's like how do they combine? And interestingly, maybe right like I don't know if you've come across these split brain patients.
1:10:54
I talk about these all the time. We've got some evidence to suggest that you kind of have two like
1:11:00
consciousnesses that are that are battling out with each other inside your very own brain. So that's the interdisciplinary thing like a lot
1:11:07
of scientific research into the way that the brain works in weird cases like split brain patients. Look into it, ladies and gentlemen. It is freaky what
1:11:14
your brain can do. Like the two hemispheres, what they can do. What's your favorite examples of this? My favorite example of this are so your
1:11:21
brain, the two hemispheres of your brain are connected by the the corpus coloss. Corpus colossum, right? It's the
1:11:26
connective tissue which actually does more to inhibit communication than facilitate communication. There seems to
1:11:32
be an evolutionary advantage to keeping them separate. Right? Some people as a severe treatment for epilepsy would
1:11:38
undergo a corpus calistomy where you sever it. Right. This is what a split brain patient is. It's someone who has
1:11:44
the connective tissue severed. They can they can still communicate through other means a little bit but basically the communication it's like a vertical decapitation.
1:11:51
Exactly. Now most people know that the left hemisphere governs broadly like the right visual field and the right
1:11:57
hemisphere broadly the left visual field. Also, the right hemisphere is supposed to be the kind of like creative
1:12:02
one and the left one is the sort of rational mathsy one. Bit of an oversimplification, but take a split
1:12:08
brain patient whose hemispheres aren't communicating properly. You can show them something just in their right
1:12:14
visual field. So, you like block off the rest of their view and you just show them something to the left hemisphere and vice versa. So, they've done some
1:12:20
experiments on such people where they will for example show them a picture of an apple and they'll say, "What can you
1:12:27
see?" and they'll say, "I I don't know. I I I don't know what you're talking about." And then you ask them to draw a
1:12:33
picture of something and they'll draw an apple because part of their brain has seen it, but part of it hasn't. You will
1:12:39
uh you will find those kinds of cases. But the most interesting to me, I needed to say that
1:12:44
to set it up, is a study that was done, I can't remember what it was. Anukica writes about this, um, where they took a
1:12:52
split brain patient and they showed one hemisphere of the brain an instruction.
1:12:58
It's an experiment, so you're you're ready to do an instruction and the instruction just says something like, "Get up and walk over there." So the
1:13:06
person reads it, they get up, they walk over to the wall, and then you ask them verbally,
1:13:11
why did you just walk over to the other side of the room, and you know what they say? It would be weird if they said, "I don't
1:13:18
know, wouldn't it?" But they don't. They give a reason. They can fabulate, but they're not making it up. They're
1:13:24
not lying. They're not They're not like, "Oh, uh oh, I they believe it. They're like, "Oh, I was um I was trying to get
1:13:31
some air. It's kind of warm in here." And they believe it. So there's this idea that one hemisphere of your brain is the so-called interpreter and that
1:13:38
you've essentially got your brain working on like like like doing particular things like you can imagine
1:13:44
working on your like emotive impulses. You just do something because you just impulsively want to or like instinctively feel it's the right thing
1:13:50
and then your left brain comes in and retrospectively says oh no no no this is the reason why I did that that I've got
1:13:55
good reason for that. And you've kind of got these two parts of your brain
1:14:00
governing different parts of your activity. What's the implication of that philosophically? The implication of that is that
1:14:06
consciousness might not be so unified as our sort of present experience leads us
1:14:13
to believe. You know, the sort of unity of of self might not actually be sort of what what's going on in in reality. Um,
1:14:21
I have a pet theory that a lot of the reason why we feel like we're in our brains. It is the sort of center of our,
1:14:27
you know, neural activity of course, but I feel like the reason why we really experience ourselves as up here is
1:14:32
because it's where our senses are, where our eyes are and our ears are. I kind of imagine that if our eyes were like on
1:14:38
our hips, we might sort of and our ears were down there too, we might sort of feel as though we were located because that is where everything is
1:14:43
being fed through. Exactly. It sort of feels like you're up here because that's where the that's where the information is. Um, lot of lot of weird weird stuff to to think about
1:14:50
this so-called combination problem. I mean, there's a lot of weird stuff in experience. It's like if I pinch myself in the hand, I feel it in my hand. I'm
1:14:56
told that it's my brain that's doing the experiencing, but I really feel it in my hand, you know? It's it's it's very strange. I think that poses a good
1:15:03
analogy for those people who think that like there is one consciousness or one like oneself like at man, which we're
1:15:08
all sort of avatars of, is like the left hand if I pinch it, my right hand doesn't feel it. But it is
1:15:14
and that's within something that is supposed to be discreetly kind of its own localized. We are we are one thing
1:15:20
but I can get this localized pain in my left hand that my right hand doesn't. So let's just scale that across the one thing that is everything.
1:15:26
Yeah. I mean people say like well my my consciousness can't be the same as yours because I don't have access to your thoughts and you don't have access to
1:15:32
mine so they're separate minds right but when you're asleep you don't have access to your waking thoughts but it's still
1:15:38
the same mind right there are a lot of like weird avenues to explore this this unity of consciousness as this sort of
1:15:44
fundamental uh the um principle of the universe. One of the interesting uh kind of coral I one thing that I I find very
1:15:51
interesting about about that kind of you know one part of our a lot of our
1:15:56
conscious reporting is the kind of PR brain so to speak is that it reminds me a lot of um of of kind of nature's
1:16:03
picture of the will and of the mind which is broadly speaking that we kind of have a parliament of different drives and that you know those drives do do
1:16:11
what they will so to speak you know there's there's not one will there are there's all of these forces pulling in different ctions and then once once once
1:16:19
we've won out on a course of action, we then put a we then justify that, you know, at least that's part of what what
1:16:24
each thinks is going on. I'm always reminded of that kind of split brain going over to the other side of the room and saying, "Oh, yeah, I went here because, you
1:16:30
know, I want to look out the window or something." It's like, "Yeah, that it's a it's quite a it's quite a surprisingly niche picture." The other um
1:16:37
part of having a picture of consciousness that is in some way combinatoric. So, um, functionalism
1:16:43
works like this, uh, as does pansychism, um, is that in theory, you can start
1:16:49
scaling things up quite extreme. So, there's the, um, it's known as the China brain experiment. You actually need far
1:16:55
more people. It's just cuz China is the most populous country, but you need far more people than the amount of people in China to do this. And the thought
1:17:00
experiment goes that say you had billions and billions and billions of people. If you made them all behave like
1:17:06
neurons kind of um you know they all had walkie-talkies or phones or something and they were you know they they'd say
1:17:11
you know they give a a code to someone else and they relay information that way exactly like a brain would that give
1:17:17
rise to a consciousness and I I know I I think that's that's a fascinating partly because you know it may it sounds crazy
1:17:23
well there's a lot of complexity there's a lot of it sounds absolutely insane but why not isn't it just as insane that you can do it with atoms and get yourself a
1:17:29
brain but also you know we we we we talk about things like hive mines and insects and things like that and we kind of you It's
1:17:34
it's you know you can say that's just a metaphor but a lot of the time you know you describe it as if it's in some sense
1:17:40
you know sharing a contract. You had um Peter Godfrey Smith on recently and uh something he says in his book is that
1:17:46
that that in a in a an octopus a huge amount of its neurons are in its
1:17:52
arms. So um I don't even mention this in the podcast. I'm so sorry I haven't seen it yet. the um but but um one one thing
1:17:58
that he might one thing he says is he ponders whether when an octopus gives an
1:18:03
instruction to its arm. It kind of gives it the general vibe and then the arm works out the details.
1:18:09
What if the what if the arm does it itself? It seems like the arm sometimes is sort of feeling and then sort of like oh what's that like then the but
1:18:15
interestingly they sort of seem to be able to act independently in that way but when they need to they suddenly become unified when there's a when
1:18:20
there's a predator they can suddenly like shoot together and and swim off as fast as they can. So it's like it's separable when it needs to be but
1:18:26
unified when it doesn't. And our brains probably do the same thing. Why do we have two hemispheres? And also, you know, just because there's some utility in it.
1:18:32
And to build on that point, you know, the the the if we if we're, you know, scaling up to the idea, we talk about or at least we're used to it. This kind of
1:18:38
follow fashion, but a lot of the a lot of the, you know, 19th century um writing, not necessarily philosophy,
1:18:44
just writers very keen on the idea of spirits of nations and things like that. you know. Mhm. Standal um the French
1:18:50
author travels around Europe and in his little notes he talks about like oh yeah the spirit of the German you know this bit
1:18:57
of Germany and the spirit of of of Italy and you know that kind of the spirits of the different regions of not nations at that point but but the different regions
1:19:03
that he's visiting and you know we we think that's kind of quaint now and a bit a bit funny you know it feels like
1:19:09
you know largely it's kind of a collection of stereotypes it's kind of amusing to read but
1:19:14
the idea of you know having groups of people having animated principles and treating them metaphorically as bits of
1:19:20
mind is, you know, is is is a metaphor. The idea that um groups of minds can
1:19:26
coales to form something analogous to a mind. If you believe in that, that makes that metaphor a lot more substantial. Um
1:19:34
I mean, you know, I I was but then, you know, the further you go down this rabbit hole, the more interesting the questions become. You know, could could
1:19:40
a bunch of people simulating a mind have a conscious experience? You know, we think about it, you know, we think about the mind as having
1:19:46
it's much easier to think about, you know, a group of, you know, 10 billion people having a thought or an idea than
1:19:54
it is the idea of 10 billion people in this neurologically unification issue.
1:19:59
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. But like I don't know. I I think you know it's the the more emotionbased you ask those questions um
1:20:06
the less intuitive it becomes. What I like about this as an example is that you can bring this down to your own
1:20:13
experience. It scales in that way because is it can you make one of your neurons have a
1:20:20
thought? Yeah. Like can it can that localized part of this localized part feel anything cuz
1:20:25
you can kind of there. Okay. But what about if you do individual nodes and then you think well if we scale it up
1:20:32
where is and this makes sense with the the combination problem. It's a little bit weird to think about right. Um, interestingly, David Hume,
1:20:37
maybe this isn't as boring as you as I accused it of being. David Hume didn't think that you would know like Hume, the famous empiricist,
1:20:43
um, like, yeah, there's a lot to say about Hume, but he he thought, for example, if you had no experience with the world, if you just, you know, had a
1:20:50
pain in your big toe or something and you'd had no experience before, you wouldn't know you it was in your big
1:20:55
toe. It's like it's it's a really weird sort of implication of of Hume's view, which I think is ridiculous. It's one of
1:21:01
the many things that Hume says, which is completely ridiculous. He thinks that you essentially need to have this experience which you then know you
1:21:07
realize has has been due to something happening in my finger and that allows you to draw that memory. I
1:21:13
I think memory is the key to a lot of this consciousness problem. Memory it allows you to string this sequence.
1:21:18
Yeah. When we think about memory again we think about it in terms of like remembering what you did yesterday. But I'm not talking about that. I'm talking
1:21:24
about remembering like remembering the instant before this instant which which
1:21:30
when you start thinking about it in those terms it becomes revolutionary if if you imagine yourself falling as we were picturing earlier with no memory
1:21:36
you'd probably act and and according to the panist experience the world a lot like the can
1:21:42
but would that not preclude a Boltzman brain would it preclude a Boltzman brain yeah just that if they coales into this
1:21:49
single form for such a short space of time how is it if it didn't exist prior to that oh Their argument would be the
1:21:55
neurons are created in such a way that as if you had memories prior to that. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Okay. Um so
1:22:01
you understand what I meant by that like if it's so transient then but encoded in its transient is the
1:22:06
the fake memory. Yeah. Exactly. I want to point out that we we're talking about this in the context of of like pansyism
1:22:13
and we're all a bit sort of woo woo and people are like this is totally crazy but the the kind of like the example Joe just gave of the the what do you call it
1:22:18
the China problem. It's called the China brain. Like we brought this up in the context of pansychism, but most people
1:22:24
listening to this are probably materialists to some degree about consciousness. They will probably think, you know, I think that consciousness is
1:22:30
just emergent of material. A bit like how, you know, zeros and ones become a picture on a screen, something like
1:22:35
that. Mhm. This example kind of poses a challenge to that because it's like if you believe that you can just take atoms, put them
1:22:42
in a particular order and get a unified conscious experience of pain, then why
1:22:49
can't I do that with individual brains? Put them together in a particular way and get a unified experience.
1:22:54
In the same way that you can make a triangle out of wood or out of stone or out of metal, you know, if you define something relationally, what you're
1:23:00
making it out of ceases to be as important. Exactly. If consciousness is just an arrangement of of atoms, then you should be able to get consciousness out of an
1:23:06
arrangement of atoms in in other ways. And if you think that's not true, then you either have to explain why it's
1:23:12
different or I suppose abandon materialism or abandon the view that consciousness is in fact emergent and is
1:23:19
not somehow fundamental. Exactly. Right. Maybe this is maybe this is it might
1:23:24
just be the messenger. It might have been the messenger so far. Sorry to everyone that's done theory of mind that's come on my podcast cuz it's like
1:23:30
five or 10 people. I think it might actually be like the next sort of big thing. I'm I'm excited about the idea. I think it's fun. I mean, I think there's
1:23:37
there's a lot to there's a lot to dislike about it, too, of course, but like it's exciting and I think people are interested in it. And
1:23:42
well, it the first thing that it gives everybody is I have always had questions
1:23:48
about my own experience. Everyone is always kind of narcissistic when it comes to that. And this is the most direct you're ever going Why am I a
1:23:55
thing? Why do I feel anything at all? Why do I sort of exist in that way? My the other thing that I'm very interested
Emotivism 101: The Morality of Emotion
1:24:01
in which is your one of your pet theories is emotivism. Mhm. Can you explain emotivism to me like
1:24:06
M12? So emotivism is a kind of a theory about ethics and a theory about language. Um
1:24:13
we've been talking so far about sort of what stuff is made out of. Um and there's lots more to be said about that
1:24:19
by the way like why everything is made out of consciousness and how we even get there. Uh that's like a kind of
1:24:25
metaphysical question in the realm of ethics. like what's good, what's bad, what should you do, what shouldn't you
1:24:30
do, everyone's familiar with that kind of language. If I say like, you know, it's bad for you to to kick a homeless
1:24:37
person on the street, you kind of understand what I'm saying. You get what I mean? But a philosopher will hear that
1:24:43
statement and try to break it down. What literally do we mean? What does this word like bad mean?
1:24:48
The ethical emotivist is someone who thinks that ethical statements are just expressions of emotion. means that when
1:24:55
you say something is good or bad or that you should or shouldn't do something, all of that moral language is a kind of
1:25:02
emotional expression. A big confusion about this is that
1:25:08
suppose I think that suppose I I just don't like murder. I just don't like it. Right? Ethical subjectivism says that
1:25:15
when I say murder is wrong, I mean to say something like I don't like murder, right? That is a reporting of my mental
1:25:22
state that I don't like it. Ethical emotivism is not a reporting of your emotional state. It is the expression of
1:25:29
the emotion itself. So it's the difference between saying I don't like murder and going like gh murder.
1:25:35
Like literally expressing it. So when I say I don't like murder, that's a claim that you can investigate.
1:25:40
Is that true? Is it true that I don't like murder? Maybe I'm lying to you. Maybe it's false. Right? So it's sort of it can be true. It can
1:25:45
be false. It's it's a a fact about my psychology. Whereas the expression of
1:25:51
distaste for murder just going as it famously has been boo murder is not the
1:25:57
kind of thing that can be true or false. You can't really like debate it exactly. It's just an expression. The emotivist
1:26:03
thinks that that's what's going on with with ethics. So AJ Ayah is kind of the father this emotivist theory in the 20th
1:26:10
century. And uh it's only one part of his philosophy but it's probably what he's most remembered for. And so he
1:26:17
compares saying like the difference between saying murder and saying murder is wrong is a bit like the difference
1:26:24
between saying murder and then saying murder with an angry emoji and three exclamation marks. It's just this like
1:26:30
emphasis on something. So okay, why think this, right? Like why why would you why would you believe this? Well, pay attention to what your
1:26:37
brain is doing when it moralizes. If I walk down the street and I kick a homeless person, you will notice a fact
1:26:43
about the world which is that I have just kicked a homeless person. And you could be completely like morally,
1:26:48
emotionally detached from that. You could just report as a fact if you were like a robot. It's a true fact. Alex
1:26:54
just kicked a homeless person, right? But if you think that it's wrong, there's something more going on. You
1:27:00
think Alex just kicked a homeless person and and what's the extra thing? What is that extra thing that makes you say that
1:27:06
it's wrong? Well, I think that if you pay attention to what your brain is doing in those instances, it's something
1:27:12
that belongs in the in the category of of emotion rather than that kind of rational thought. Like that extra bit
1:27:20
that's making you say it's wrong versus just reporting it. Is that extra bit more like, you know, when you burn your
1:27:27
hand and take it away or when you get angry at someone for doing something or is it more like 2 plus 2 is four and the
1:27:33
sky is blue. Like which of those is it more like? I think it it much more strongly belongs in the category of emotion. And so that the actual isolated
1:27:39
moral element of the statement it's wrong to kick a homeless person is is an ethical expression.
1:27:46
Okay. An emotional expression. You've probably heard me talk about element before. Come on. Frankly, that's
1:27:52
because I'm dependent on it and it's how I've started every morning for the last 3 years. Element is a tasty electrolyte
1:27:58
drink mixed with everything that you need and nothing that you don't eat. Grab-and-go stick pack contains a
1:28:04
sciencebacked electrolyte ratio of sodium, potassium, and magnesium with no sugar, no coloring, no artificial
1:28:09
ingredients, or any other junk. It plays a critical role in reducing muscle cramps and fatigue while optimizing
1:28:14
brain health, regulating appetite, and curbing cravings. The orange flavor Uh-huh. in a cold glass of water is like
1:28:22
a sweet salty orangey nectar and I genuinely feel the difference
1:28:29
versus when I've started it and when I've used it and when I haven't.
1:28:35
Anyway, they've got a no questions asked refund policy with an unlimited duration. So, you can buy it and try it for as long as you want and if you don't
1:28:40
like it for any reason, they will give you your money back and you don't even need to return the box. That's how confident they are that you'll love it.
1:28:46
Plus, they offer free shipping in the US. And right now, you can get a free sample pack of Element's most popular flavors with your first purchase by
1:28:53
going to the link in the description below or heading to drinklnt.com/modern wisdom. That's drinklnt.com/modern
1:29:02
wisdom. If emotivism is true, does that mean that morality is just
Is Morality Just Vibes?
1:29:07
vibes? More or less. Yeah. Although it's important, I think the one thing worth noting is is that even if you put
1:29:14
forward this emotivist thesis, it doesn't necessarily mean that anything goes. So we we're very we're very quick to
1:29:19
because that's that's an obvious sort of follow on but just because we're very quick to generally say okay something is I'll say
1:29:25
subjective um in the sense that you know I say it's different from subjectivism but but you know there's somebody can
1:29:32
say boo and another person can say yay at least in theory but of course there are constraints on this I I think that sometimes we get very caught up in ideas
1:29:39
about objectivity and subjectivity and actually sometimes um I think what we're actually often
1:29:45
getting at is the between stability and instability. So, and like most people
1:29:50
think that beauty is subjective in some way, right? Beauty is in the eye of the beholder famously and there are people that dispute that, but that's a pretty
1:29:57
majority view. It doesn't follow from that that you can in fact find anything beautiful. You just like try like if you
1:30:04
try and you know look at a dog turd on the street and just be like so many of my analogies have been dog turd related
1:30:09
but you know a dog turd on the street and just try and find it beautiful you'll find that you can't. And so
1:30:15
plausibly there are still restrictions on the kind of things that that people can and in fact do find beautiful. And
1:30:22
so you kind of say it doesn't follow just from yeah if you were a motivist it doesn't follow just from the fact that
1:30:30
uh or the the idea putting forward that um all ethical statements are emotional
1:30:35
expressions that this means that we're going to have total chaos and that everyone's going to value different things. there are plausibly just
1:30:41
pragmatic constraints on the kind of things that people feel moral disgust about um which is going to cause some kind of
1:30:47
consensus. Yeah. So like I mean you know the class I mean one I mean one way of looking at at it is is the the the the tribe of 150
1:30:55
people that say yay murder aren't going to be they're not going to last very long. They're going to be out competed by people who are very boomer cancerous
1:31:02
memes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, these these kinds of responses function in a similar way to ethical subjectivism, which like most
1:31:08
people are familiar with this idea that some people think that ethics is real. Maybe it's given by God. Maybe it's
1:31:14
inscribed into the foundation of the universe. Um, and some people think, no, we essentially kind of make it up. And the debate is is always this practical
1:31:21
one of like, well then, you know, how can you say that this was wrong? How can you say that that was right? Some people just say, well, you can't. So, one thing
1:31:27
to note is that it may be true that if we all became emotivists, the world would become a complete disaster and
1:31:33
people would just start being self-indulgent. That wouldn't make it untrue. It would just make it not very practical to believe and therefore
1:31:38
maybe, you know, we should cut this segment and not let anyone hear about it, right? But if you're asking what is vibe coding human,
1:31:44
it's true. It it will evolutionarily self- deselect. So, like it's not it's not if it were actually a bad thing to
1:31:49
believe that that doesn't mean that it's had a lot of emotivist ancestors, but
1:31:54
they maybe didn't stick about. Yeah. or or like if it is in fact something that would lead to this sort of this arbitrary disaster. Do
1:32:01
you think it does? Um, no. For a few reasons. Partly because I agree with you. I mean, people will be listening to this going like,
1:32:07
well, I think I could see a dog [ __ ] as as beautiful in the right sort of context. And I I think that's true. But the point remains that there are things
1:32:12
that you find beautiful that you can't just choose to not. And there are things that you don't find beautiful that you can't just choose to become beautiful.
1:32:18
Um I think there is a degree on fundamental matters of like somewhat
1:32:23
universal agreement in the same way that we kind of broadly agree on many artistic points right we might have you
1:32:30
know I don't like impressionism and I think Van Go is overrated but broadly speaking we have an idea of of one piece
1:32:36
of art being like you know a good beautiful piece of art and one thing like not really being a piece of art at all. Um but of course there's so much
1:32:44
room for subjectivity there that on the moral particulars you run into a problem. How do I think this can be addressed? Well, one important thing to
1:32:50
note is that AJ Aya talks about this most moral debate because this is the
1:32:57
thing that you undercut the ability to debate morals to say I think I'm right and you're wrong if it's all just
1:33:02
feeling. You can't do that. You're just feeling so you can't morally debate. A points out that the vast majority of
1:33:07
moral debate that you hear on a regular basis is not actually moral debate. It's debate about facts which then inform
1:33:14
your moral view. So imagine you're having a debate about gun violence in America. The debate might sound
1:33:22
something like, you know, did you know that, you know, if we criminalized guns,
1:33:28
then gun rellated deaths would drop by 10,000 every year. Oh, but you know, having a swimming pool is more dangerous
1:33:34
than having a these these are factual claims that you can test. You can you can run statistics and you can find out
1:33:39
whether they're true or false. And a lot of the debate consists in that sort of factual disagreement, but the actual moral element
1:33:45
isn't actually being brushed up against. What people are trying to do there, which would, I guess, at least reinforce
1:33:51
the emotivism view, is get further up the stack from someone's emotive
1:33:58
outburst. Yeah. And say, well, actually, the fact that your emotions are based on are different. Let me change those facts and
1:34:04
see what Exactly. And it would just it would just bring about a new emotional state. Suppose you were like you you were you
1:34:10
were really scared of getting on a train and I said to you right now, "Oh, we're going to go to Edinburgh." And you felt an emotion of fear and then I just told
1:34:17
you a fact which is, "Oh, we're going to get the plane instead." You your emotion would change. I haven't like convinced
1:34:23
you on an emotional level. I haven't like changed your emotions exactly. I've changed facts which then dictate what
1:34:28
your emotional state is. Presumably, you could also teach me some things about the safety record of That's also true. which would change
1:34:35
your emotional state without just you saying I'm scared of trains and me being like no you're not and then we have
1:34:41
debate doesn't make any sense right that's not actually how it goes and that's actually not how it goes in morality a lot of the time you know
1:34:46
because if you if you find two people who are debating about guns and one says that you know if we have guns on the
1:34:53
streets then you know people are going to get attacked and another person says yeah but when somebody's attacked like do you only want the bad guys to have
1:34:59
guns don't you want good people to be able to defend them what's the like moral boo and yay there. It's something
1:35:04
like, you know, boo innocent people dying, you know, like they probably agree on that and then it's just sort of
1:35:10
a factual dispute of what what will sort of bring about that that innocent people dying. So, does that suggest that people's
1:35:16
moralities aren't actually as divergent as we think that they are? That most people agree on most things when it
1:35:22
comes to morality? Not necessarily. Um, it's actually a very difficult question to answer. The thing I'm intending to get across here
1:35:28
is that if it is the case that there is this big problem with something like emotivism that it doesn't allow us to to
1:35:35
have these debates and say that people are wrong. I think that it would be much more restricted than people would first imagine cuz you first think gosh I can't
1:35:43
say you know I can't say that you're wrong to to to do I can't say that you're wrong to to steal that apple from
1:35:48
the store. I can't say that you're you know it's a good thing to to you know walk your wife home or something. You
1:35:53
know what I mean? Like but that's not the case. If there were some kind of disagreement that we were unable to resolve, it would be much more
1:35:59
foundational and much more broad that might exist. It might not. Our evolutionary psychology might be such
1:36:05
that we on the most fundamental level like basically are made of the same stuff. Um but it does seem plausible to
1:36:11
me that there could be genuinely irresoluble like foundational value complex. I suppose one potential
1:36:17
candidate for that would be um the notion of rights versus consequences which is a sort of you know so yeah in
1:36:24
that's like one way one way of you know a lot of is say I'm having an argument with someone and about I don't know let's do
1:36:31
the gun control example I know nothing about the facts on the ground about gun control but one thing somebody might say is just
1:36:37
no I have a right this and that's that's would be an ethical statement and thus an expression but
1:36:43
people do use that in a kind of loadbearing justificatory way. I think that would be one example of a of a type
1:36:49
of moral disagreement that emotivism would struggle to accommodate. You might be able to get it in find that it would break down because I agree with you like
1:36:55
you you'd break it down to like you know someone ultimately isn't just going boo innocent people dying
1:37:00
because that's a sort of consequentialist view like innocent people dying that's a bad consequence boo another person might be like boo taking my rights away
1:37:07
and that would actually conflict however I think one person's uh priority and another person's priority and who trumps
1:37:13
but I do think that both of these in fact are not actually foundational right because you've got to break down this
1:37:19
con you say boo innocent people dying and Like I can think of 10 examples off the top of my head where you'd be okay with an innocent person dying, right?
1:37:26
And likewise, you know, boo rights are notoriously difficult to actually justify or ground. So if you had further
1:37:31
conversation with these people, you might find that the emotional motivation
1:37:37
that has led one person to innocent people dying is bad and another person to, you know, rights being being
1:37:43
violated as bad is actually the same wellspring as it were. Um, and if that's the case, then this problem goes away.
1:37:49
It might not be the case though and then you are left with this problem of like value conflicts that can't be resolved but it's much more restricted and would
1:37:56
probably operate on the level of like societies rather than individuals which guess what it does and we kind of like
1:38:01
just accept that some societies have different morals and some some don't. That's a good point. I suppose the other
1:38:07
at least on the particulars the other cannibals we we don't well the the the other the other um
1:38:12
potential issue you might find is is that it it is entirely possible that we just
1:38:17
have a non-foundationalist moral psychology. So on that we've kind of said oh well you know maybe we won't end
1:38:23
up disagreeing because we'll get down to fundamentals. But I would potentially, you know, it's certainly a possibility
1:38:29
that we have just loose branches of moral statements, you know, like I think, you know, um that's a good
1:38:36
example. So like the the example that was did I think this in Jonathan Heights
1:38:41
book he uses the example of he takes a bunch of consequentialists and then um asks them about like the kind of
1:38:47
theoretical consequencefree incest scenario where um where you know which which basically just never exists in
1:38:53
real life but in this kind of laboratory setting he kind of posits it and he often finds that you know that
1:38:59
that's a kind of that's something that people will condemn regardless of the foundation their stated foundation to
1:39:05
morality. I suppose that's that's one potential um counter. You talked to Simon Blackburn recently. Is he still
1:39:11
calling himself a quasi realist? He actually regrets inventing that term. Okay. What does he call himself now? I I'm not sure what he actually calls
1:39:17
himself now. I think he's still a non-cognitivist. Um Blackburn is is a is a is a non-cognitivist of a kind of
1:39:23
emotivist. Um he's got a lot of interesting things to say about that. I just did a whole episode with him, so you know, watch it. Um I think what you
1:39:31
just said, what did you just say? Was I realist before that? Oh. Um, about the idea of it it's it's possible that
1:39:38
our e the the ethical statements that we will boo and huray at are are not a
1:39:44
foundational structure. Indeed, in a motivism, we would we might expect that to also be the case
1:39:49
in emotivism because whereas whereas in a kind of standard cognitivist picture of ethics, we come to our ethical propositions
1:39:56
through having a kind of base level set of ethical principles that we believe are true and then derive our ethics from
1:40:01
that. an emotivist kind of throws out that picture entirely. So another explanatory problem you might posit for
1:40:08
ethic for emotivism in ethics which is basically a variant on um frag
1:40:13
which is uh would be like oh well we have this whole inferential setup um for
1:40:19
our ethical propositions that we don't for emotions you know do do it doesn't
1:40:24
you know I don't I don't get angry because I've inferred anger from some kind of previous emotional principle I
1:40:31
might get angry because somebody does something that I perceive to be an injust justice. But that's that's going
1:40:36
from a a thing that I believe to be true. And that kind of this whole inferential structure that our ethics seems to follow and at the very least we
1:40:42
want our ethics to follow as an ideal. We hold people being ethically inconsistent as a bad thing seems to
1:40:48
rely on some kind of underlying intuitive cognitivism. So there are like there are different problems you can have with with emotivism and
1:40:54
non-cognitivism and ethics more generally, but there are responses to those problems and I think you know some of them incest.
Emotivism and the Incest Question
1:40:59
One good proof of of emotivism might just be the incest question. Um it's it's famously difficult for people to to
1:41:06
deal with incest and it's always funny watching people sort of wriggle um thinkers on stage when somebody's brave enough to ask the question why why it's
1:41:12
wrong. Um consequentialists are notoriously bad at justifying this and they'll say things like well because you
1:41:17
know incest leads to having disabled children in response to which there are a few
1:41:22
questions. Firstly what's wrong with having disabled children? Secondly, you know, obviously what about the like in
1:41:29
cases where procreation is not going to be possible. That's obviously like a side issue. We can obviously correct. Oh, well, there's like a power imbalance
1:41:35
between okay, we can obviously just like just answer the question, right? You know what I'm asking you and people can't do it. The emotivist, bear in
1:41:42
mind, this is one of the most universal taboos in the world is the incest taboo. It's like everywhere. Interestingly,
1:41:47
some societies have variant forms where it's like it's okay to marry your older sister but not your younger sister.
1:41:54
Stuff like that. It's kind of weird. I mean, famously cousins were in the royal family, were Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, cousins have
1:42:00
always been a sort of uh a sort of stick in the stick in the mud
1:42:06
for this. Like they've people don't seem to care so much about cousins historically, but but quite clearly they're the Goldilocks zone of familial
1:42:13
relation. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. For keeping it in the family, but not you know, they're close enough that you know them. You don't have to actually go
1:42:19
that hard looking. You end up with these 15th century monarchs with chins out to ear. It's true. It's true. So they say um but
1:42:26
clearly there is this universal taboo and most people just instinctively think it is just well what's the word
1:42:33
realistically what's the word it's something like it's just gross man it's just it's just it's not the emotivist
1:42:38
says yeah that that's that's what's going on right and so the the wrongness of incest when you when you recognize
1:42:44
how difficult it is for people of a non just prescriptivist moral theory like if you're if you're a believer in God who
1:42:50
thinks that it's just revealed that it's the wrong thing to do then then fine that still doesn't actually explain why it's wrong just tells you that it's
1:42:56
wrong. But for any secular ethicist, it's it's notoriously difficult when you when you
1:43:01
uh select out those those other factors. And so if I ask you Chris, like if you think incest is wrong, I don't know what
1:43:06
you would say. I'm an only child, so it's actually really difficult to difficult to I I I've thought about this a little
1:43:12
bit. It was you that first taught me about the incest question and then Jonathan height kind of like I read it in full.
1:43:18
Two things. First off, the reason that humans uh feel incest
1:43:23
aversion is because of something called the Westermark window. Familiar with this? Okay. So, the Westermark effect
1:43:29
is um young children that are raised together that spend sort of infant and young
1:43:36
child years. Yeah. In close proximity, especially if they see their mother raising another child,
1:43:43
they have sexual aversion to them. This is adaptive, right? You do not know who
1:43:48
your sister is. You don't know who that person is. What you do know is that that
1:43:54
particular individual was fed and cared for by your mother and you played with them and they were around between zero
1:44:02
and 10 years old. Uh this leads to some pretty difficult situations. If you have
1:44:08
twins or brother and sister that are separated at birth, they've missed this Westermark window. They do not have
1:44:15
sexual revulsion. Now cognitively they might but that like ick that apparently people who have brothers and sisters I
1:44:21
don't have a brother brother or sister so I don't like to me that innate sense when you do this anytime that you do the
1:44:28
incest question people's faces start to sort of squeeze a little there is I feel this is the one time in
1:44:35
my life that I feel like a psychopath for you the incest question is just intellectual masturbation prec specifically intellectual um
1:44:43
there's no not to get not to Like I I don't like to make the examples like this personal, but I mean you have
1:44:49
parents, you know, like that's true. Surely the thought of um without going any further with that sentence, you you
1:44:55
get what I'm driving at. Like there is a there is that I can map that on. There's something you can That's true. But anyway, Western Mark
1:45:01
window really interesting. So if you have uh brother and sister or uh
1:45:06
specifically the classic sort of daddy issues thing, daughter and father, dead beat dad, dad leaves, dad comes back in.
1:45:12
Sometimes this happens and they don't even know, you know, adopted kids, so on and so forth. And uh you end up finding
1:45:20
because there is a kind of resonance that's in that. You think, wow, like this person just seems so like me. And
1:45:25
it's like, yeah, they share quite a bit of your genetics. Well, look, but the thing is like I I think there are all kinds of
1:45:31
explanations you can give for like why this this taboo has emerged. But like there are there are explanations for
1:45:37
things that that do not equate to justifications for things. You know, I
1:45:42
could explain why human beings have an inherent like racial bias, you know, because when you're living in tribes, it
1:45:48
makes sense to be suspicious of other. So I can I can explain evolutionarily why, you know, somebody might be a bit racist, but most people think actually
1:45:55
that's wrong. Like we don't want to do that. Like so it's not it's not a justification for it. It's an explanation for why it exists in the
1:46:00
human psychology. So you can explain why the incest taboo exists in the human psychology and why it cropped up in some areas and not others. But if you think
1:46:07
it's wrong, I'm going to ask you why. And as an emotivist, I can I can if someone says, "Well, I think it's I've
1:46:13
had this conversation with people in the pub and they say they give me an emotivist answer." They say, "But it's just it's it's just disgust. It's
1:46:19
disgusting. That's your brother, you know, that's your sister. It's just I'm like, "Yeah, exactly." And it's it's like one of the most I think compelling
1:46:26
uh cases for emotivism. Everybody's lapping as an emotivist when it comes to the incest question, but rather they're lapping as something
1:46:32
else until it comes to the emotivist around question. Yeah. So much of it actually breaks down
1:46:37
to to emotion. There there are lots of reasons. You identify as this an emotivist to be clear.
1:46:43
Yeah. Not Yeah. Um yeah, I think I think so. Um I find it I'm I
1:46:49
some sort of qualifier quasi I've got kind of philosophical commitment issues, you know, like I I I
1:46:55
find it very difficult to call myself anything really. Like it's it's it's because you're philosophically non- monogous.
1:47:01
Yeah. Not just because not not just on a practical level of like oh you'll be held to it and people will but just because like you know who who bloody
1:47:07
knows man like realistically who because we like to put labels on things. Yeah. That's right. Um like we like to
1:47:12
put labels and emotions such as good and bad. I mean I think one way I've I've tried to explain this and and why I do call myself an emotivist and say yes I
1:47:19
am one but like you know pending corrections as it were. Um I I would you
1:47:24
know drop it in a moment if there were was sort of good evidence against emotivist agnostic. Yeah. Like like emotivist with a degree
1:47:33
of emotivist curious confidence. Yeah. Yeah. Um I think if you imagine what it
1:47:39
would be like if we didn't have a word for anxiety. It's like there was no word for it, right? And you were feeling anxious. You would try to describe your
1:47:46
feeling to me by using other emotional terms. You'd say like, "Oh, well, I feel a bit it's sort of like sadness, but I'm
1:47:52
like excited. I I don't really know how." And so, you isolate that feeling. Give it its own word.
1:47:58
So, if I ask you in that kicking the homeless person case, what is the extra thing you're feeling other than just the
1:48:03
the knowledge of the descriptive fact? Well, it's something like
1:48:09
no or something like stop or don't or boo or gross. And it's none of those things, but it's
1:48:15
something a bit like that. So we sort of put a put a box around this this this feeling and give it a a label and I think we've done that and and that label
1:48:22
is bad. Uh and so you kind of it belongs in that category.
1:48:28
One one big mistake people make I think with emotivism is that you say that ethics is an expression of emotion. I
1:48:34
don't mean that bad or shouldn't maps on to pre-existing emotions that we know of
1:48:40
like you know boo and anger and frustration. It's its own unique
1:48:45
emotion. Those are just like an it belongs in that category, right? People often think that an emotist thinks that
1:48:50
murder is wrong means something like expressing anger or distaste or disgust.
1:48:55
It's not. It's its own unique thing. It's it's expressing wrongness, which is its own thing, distinct from
1:49:00
those things, but it belongs in that category. It's a kind of emotion. You know what I mean? Yeah, I do. I do. I'm I'm interested. Is
Do Philosophy Influencers Have a Moral Duty?
1:49:06
there a philosophy of influence? Because you two are both influential, study this
1:49:12
stuff. Do you have a responsibility that is philosophically interesting given
1:49:17
that you are supposed to be at least in some way sources of insight around the study of ethics, the study of logic, the
1:49:24
study of philosophy? Is there an additional level of responsibility that you have as the closer to the source of
1:49:31
where this comes from to be extra highly scrutinous with the way that you sort of put ideas across and what you talk
1:49:37
about? I suppose I mean I suppose there's a base level of trying to be accurate, right? you know, you try and get things
1:49:42
right. Inevitably, you sometimes get things wrong, but you know, you try and get things right. I think that um you know, I think that's
1:49:49
I think another thing that um I'm very keen on when presenting philosophies is
1:49:55
to try and get across that this is only really a starting point, right? This
1:50:00
isn't this isn't um me from your computer screen telling you what's definitely true about the nature of the
1:50:07
life and the universe. being ridiculous, but that hopefully if you find some of
1:50:13
this helpful or you find some of this insightful, it will be kind of gristed for the mill of your own thinking.
1:50:18
Um I'm very like I I think that I think this about a lot of um you know people
1:50:25
quite often talk about things like um videos on YouTube or or podcasts or or or various different types of just
1:50:32
disseminating media um will sort of react with a little bit of skepticism. people about news articles and
1:50:38
journalisms um where they sort of say something like oh yeah but you know the the the there are flaws
1:50:44
within this medium you know you'll errors will creep in etc etc etc and that's they're certainly right I think that the um one of the correct correct
1:50:54
one of the um appropriate responses that I I I feel to that is to is to try and
1:51:00
frontload a kind of a statement of your own fallibility so that inevitably
1:51:06
you'll get things wrong. We all get things wrong. Um this is a justice privilege thing that we were talking about.
1:51:12
Yes. Yeah. And I but I and I think it's important to to say that because quite a lot of you know you're on you're on you
1:51:19
know you're on YouTube you're at the very least presenting yourself as knowing more than the viewer about something. And so it's it's very easy
1:51:25
all of the kind of implicit signals there are saying I know I am right. Listen to me position of authority. I am
1:51:31
authority. And I think that it's I think that it's if in order to kind of do what
1:51:37
what I want to do, which is to to largely get people doing this philosophy for themselves and for this to just be
1:51:43
something that they look back on in 5 years and think, "Oh, yeah, that was a kind of quaint starting point, but now I'm I'm much further along than that. I
1:51:48
don't need this anymore." Um, part of doing that is to frontload the idea that you're wrong. You don't have the f you might be wrong. You don't
1:51:54
have the final word. This is just a smattering of the literature, etc. you you see yourself as kind of the child's
1:52:00
Hulk Hogan playset of lifting weights before someone actually goes and gets a gym membership. Well, I suppose thing is that, you know,
1:52:06
you're never going to be able to get you're never going to be able to like compress all of the complexity of even a
1:52:11
single philosopher into like a 30-minute YouTube video. Um, it it's just not possible. There's just they're all very
1:52:17
complicated. But you might be able to give people a general idea and also
1:52:23
hopefully put them in a position whereby if they choose to go and look at that philosopher or that philosophy or that
1:52:28
philosophical question for themselves, they are then slightly better equipped to do that. And you know, hopefully if
1:52:33
they find some bit helpful, it it helps them in their everyday life. It might do, it might not. But that's what that's what I tend to think. I think that,
1:52:40
you know, no medium of communicating any kind of information is perfect. And I think that uh a lot of the the way that
1:52:46
I like to react to that is to just frontload the flaws if they're not obvious. I mean, you know, disclaimer, disclaimer, disclaimer, like
1:52:52
like, you know, public debates are a bit like that. You know, public debates have numerous flaws, right? They they they are um often times people be persuaded
1:53:01
by emotional rhetoric rather than, you know, strict logical reasoning because that's just part of how we're wired. I
1:53:07
don't think that that's necessarily a problem until we start pretending that public debate is something that it's
1:53:12
not. As long as we bear that in mind of some unique insight into wisdom and accuracy.
1:53:17
Yes, exactly. As long as as long as we're not watching Nod's the guy who does debate very regular. I think you pretty much shared my view
1:53:23
on this as well. There's nothing wrong with with theater, you know, but you got to know that that's what you're doing. What's your thoughts on this? You know,
1:53:29
if we're moving into a world with philosophers as influencers, surely the platform comes with a huge ethical duty
1:53:35
not to mislead given that ethics is part of the source code of what you guys at least in part are supposed to do or be
1:53:40
remotely educated in. Yeah. I mean, look, we find it interesting and fun and there's a a kind
1:53:46
of academic um duty to not mislead, not misrepresent people's opinions and that
1:53:52
kind of stuff. But if you are going to reduce this down to do as I say, not as I do. No, no, no, no. I it's it's the reason I
1:53:57
trip over myself to to to indicate my agnosticism even about things I believe. Doesn't mean I don't have an opinion,
1:54:03
but it means that I could be talked out of it at any moment. I do that with something as inert as like meta ethics
1:54:08
because you know earlier today we spoke for 5 or 10 minutes about suicide and
1:54:14
there's somebody listening to this podcast for whom that's going to be the most significant discourse that they've
1:54:20
heard on the subject possibly in their life probably in the past few days and
1:54:25
you know past month or year or so. Um if somebody's thinking about that a lot you
1:54:30
might have some influence over their thoughts on an issue as important as that. That's not something to just sort of piss about with, you know, um it's
1:54:38
serious. This stuff matters to people and it's worth remembering that sometimes philosophy is just people in
1:54:45
this sort of intellectual playground having a bit of fun. And there's nothing wrong with that, but it's not always that. And if it is always that, then
1:54:52
you're kind of probably wasting your time in idle leisure and you should do something more constructive. Um you
1:55:00
always end up castigating. You always end up sort of finger wagging after a little while. Yeah. But it's you've asked me to
1:55:06
reflect upon my own sense of duty and I think that you need to wag your own finger in the mirror every now and again
1:55:12
and and remember that like it's great fun and I love what I do and it's it's it's an amazing thrill and and beautiful
1:55:18
opportunity to be able to make a living doing things like this, but it's not all fun in games. Like it
1:55:23
does come with a kind of a duty and a responsibility that it's easy to forget about because here we are having a conversation. We talk about this stuff
1:55:29
all the time. we're going to, you know, go off to the pub and forget about it later on today. But but
1:55:34
that's not the case for for for everyone who are listening. You think of certain areas of philosophy
1:55:41
or maybe most areas of philosophy is kind of like information hazards in that way.
1:55:46
I think that information hazards are a bit of a I mean we were we were talking about like the concept of overrated
1:55:54
philosophical ideas or ideas that should you know get in the bin. Get in the bin. And I kind of think information hazards are are one example.
1:56:01
Oh, nice. Because basilis part of this whole AI hype that that a lot of it is just sort of sensationalist and and and
1:56:06
I think doesn't have a very good good grounding. You know the analogy that I mean though like a high potent cognitive
1:56:12
specifically not not a not an information hazard in that literal sense but but yeah like there are maybe there
1:56:18
are things that are sort of not worth knowing um or not worth exploring right there there are topic areas which which just
1:56:24
aren't worth the price of entry is too high getting into um but that's sort of for you to
1:56:29
decide whether you whether you find it interesting whether you find it find it worthwhile um I don't know I I sort of
1:56:36
we we stand on the shoulders of giants as it as Newton said um in that I see myself as a communicator of ideas. I
1:56:42
don't really say anything genuinely novel or unique. There's nothing new under the sun. I'm just
1:56:48
trying to communicate other people's ideas. So my principal responsibility is trying to do so in a way that makes
1:56:53
sense. Like why am I talking to people about this? There must be some application for for why I'm doing it.
1:57:00
Um, but but I think yeah, being a communicator
1:57:05
rather than somebody who's who's trying to put a steadfast view into the world makes it a little easier.
1:57:11
Is that just a very slippery way of never having to actually stand your ground? Maybe. Um, but if in order to be
1:57:21
successful in any field, including my own, I would have to plant my feet firmly in the ground and say, "This is what I believe and I don't think that
1:57:28
I'm wrong about it." Then I'd probably give up and go home. At least for now. I mean, maybe I'll feel that way one day,
1:57:33
but for now at least. I mean, you know, the idea that the idea that a 26-year-old
1:57:40
philosophy YouTuber would like know anything significant with the level of
1:57:45
certainty that is immune to a healthy dose of agnosticism is completely
1:57:50
batshit insane. There's just no way that's ever going to be true, you know, or justified.
1:57:56
Even the incest question. Even especially especially on the incest question. Yeah. Yeah. Gentlemen, I appreciate both
1:58:02
of you very much. I wish that we could keep going for longer, but this uh location is going to kick us out.
1:58:07
It looks like it's literally about to collapse in on us. Yeah, perhaps any longer. Look, I I I
1:58:12
genuinely appreciate both of you. I think it's so cool that we've got uh two British guys leading uh contributing to
1:58:20
leading forth philosophical influence uh unsolicited advice and Alex Okconor
1:58:25
within reason. You don't have a podcast, do you, Joe? I don't. I want to I'm going to start interviewing a few people. I've got a few people lined up. I told him what to
1:58:31
call it. You know what he should call it? Solicited advice. Solicited advice. It's there. It's right there in front of
1:58:37
you. Uh, boys, thank you very much for coming through. You got it, man. Thank you. Congratulations on making it to the end
1:58:42
of a very British conversation there. Uh, I actually sat down with Joe one-on-one uh about existentialism,
1:58:49
absurdism, nature, ton of other interesting stuff. And that's available right here.
1:58:55
Come on, press