https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhzxQraB2m0
Sara Imari Walker | An Informational Theory of Life | Long Now Talks
32,495 views  May 28, 2025  Long Now Talks
“What is life?”

In her Long Now Talk, astrobiologist and theoretical physicist Sara Imari Walker explores the many dimensions of that seemingly simple question. 

Starting from the simplest precursors, Walker assembled a grand cathedral of meaning, tracing an arc across existence that linked the fundamentals of organic chemistry, the possibility space of lego bricks, and the materialist philosophy of Madonna.

As the leader of one of the largest international theory groups in the origins of life and astrobiology, Walker has worked an interdisciplinary team of researchers to devise assembly theory: a theory of life and its origins that finds that life is the only way to create complex objects, and that the existence of complex objects is fundamentally and quantifiably rare. Assembly theory’s focus on complexity and countability allows astrobiologists like Walker to grapple with the sheer vastness of combinatorial space — the set of all things that could possibly exist. 

That set is vaster than the universe itself can hold, which, of course, raises a foundational question: if the universe cannot exhaust all possibilities of what can exist, what determines what actually exists, and what merely could exist?

Assembly theory uses the concept of the "assembly index" to measure  the complexity of objects in the universe, quantifying how many steps are required to build something —  a molecule like ATP, the primary energy-carrier in cells, for example. The theory finds that items above a given assembly index of 15 cannot be produced repeatedly by any known process save for life itself — a complexity threshold governed by the size of the possibility space. Implied here is that matter itself holds information. Within the physical dimensions and history of any given object is a measure of the information required to construct it. Likewise, historical contingency matters: it determines what gets constructed within the space of all theoretically possible constructions.

In Walker's words: "We are our history."

Life is causal histories — lineages of propagating information. Assembly theory conceptualizes objects as entities defined by their possible formation histories, allowing a unified language for describing selection, evolution and the generation of novelty. Within assembly theory, the fundamental unit of life is not the cell, but the lineage.

This talk was presented April 1, 02025 at the Cowell Theater in San Francisco. 
Episode notes: https://longnow.org/ideas/information...

The event livestream is here: https://youtube.com/live/l0YHLR3GhqE?...
    
This talk is part of Long Now Talks.

Launched by Stewart Brand in 02003, Long Now Talks has invited more than 400 leading thinkers to share their civilization-scale ideas with a live audience and millions around the globe tuning in to our podcast and videos. Long Now Talks are brought to you by The Long Now Foundation, which has spent the last 25 years igniting cultural imagination around long-term thinking.

By inspiring thought and conversation about how we've been shaped by the last 10,000 years and what might be in store for us over the next 10,000 years, Long Now Talks seek to expand our collective sense of the present moment. Long Now Talks cover futurism and speculative fiction; time, nature, and contemplative practices; the intersection of the humanities and sciences; the evolution of counterculture to cyberculture; cultural imagination, land art and public monuments; and of course, long-term thinking and being a good ancestor.

In our age of compounding crises, The Long Now Foundation is a counterweight — our community of 12,000 strong across 65 countries over our first quarter century. We are a force that imagines new possibilities, thinks critically, and takes action over the long term. We believe that when we all come together, bound by commitment and curiosity, audacious things become possible. Will you join us?  https://longnow.org/join

---

0:01
[Music]
0:11
Good evening. Welcome to our Long Now Talk with Sarah Omari
0:17
[Applause] Walker. I'm Rebecca Lendel, executive
0:22
director here at the Long Now Foundation. I'm excited to now introduce to you our
0:29
guest host for the evening, Benjamin Bratton, director of the Antictherra program at the Burguan Institute.
0:35
Benjamin and Sarah are longtime collaborators and they're working at the very edges of their respective
0:40
disciplines and they're we're fortunate to have them here with us tonight as um kind of voyagers at these new frontiers
0:46
of thought. Thank you for being with us and enjoy and over to you Benjamin
0:52
Bratton. [Applause] Uh thanks Rebecca. As you'll see Sarah's
0:58
talk is going to be quite a wild ride. Um so what I sort of come up with is sort of like say some key concepts of
1:06
walkerism that if you can kind of hold on to this may help uh give you a little bit of a of a of a menu of what you're
1:12
in in store for. First um astrobiology. We generally think of astrobiology as
1:18
like the Martians have stuff from outer space. No, it's also a way in which we think about us right here. We are the
1:24
astrobiology life in relationship to this second selection. What we think of
1:30
as natural selection uh begins before biology. It's actually much deeper uh in
1:35
in time uh and deeper in in process which if you uh think about it actually sort of changes everything. Life which
1:43
is the main sort of the topic of Sarah's work is something that is different from being alive. Alive and life are actually
1:51
different things which she will um explain in some detail that life as life
1:56
evolves and acrus it builds upon itself. Um it's all about scaffolds and
2:02
scaffolds building on scaffolds and scaffolds building on scaffolds that becomes increasingly complex. The newest
2:08
thing is actually the oldest thing as Sarah will explain. So the the amount of complexity in something also speaks to
2:15
the amount of time it took for this to evolve. The amount of time in something is the amount of complexity in it. And
2:20
so the most complex things in our universe like our technosphere are actually the oldest
2:26
things. Technologies, the things that we call technologies um are themselves a
2:32
form of life. They're not separate from life. They are a kind of life and they are also a kind of life with which we
2:38
think. We think through the technologies which allow us to see the world in a different way which then allows us to
2:43
remake the world in a different way. So once again, it's life making life um all the way on
2:49
down. What is the basic unit of life? Well, for for some it was the cell. For
2:55
Sarah, it's the whole planet. It takes a planet to make what we recognize as
3:00
life. All of the processes working together to come to constitute what we recognize in this form. And then lastly,
3:07
to discover life is is going to prove something that ultimately I think in
3:13
walkerism hasn't actually happened yet will be more like discovering gravity uh
3:19
than anything else. So those are sort of eight key ideas. If you can manage to hold all of these in your head at once,
3:24
this will give you a little bit of a a starting point to uh what you're about to experience. With that, I'm very happy
3:30
to introduce Sarah Amari Walker. Thank you.
3:41
I'm so happy to see everyone here tonight. Thanks so much for coming out. I think we're going to have a very fun evening. I'm really excited to share
3:47
some ideas with you. Uh this is all a work in progress and I want you to feel
3:52
like you're on a part of the journey because really the research program is is fundamentally about what we are as
3:58
living things. And what I hope that we can do with the kind of work that we're doing is actually develop new languages
4:05
to understand ourselves. And so when I'm thinking fundamentally about the nature of life, I think we don't understand it
4:12
yet. It's a little bit like what Ben was saying in the introduction. We It's like think about how humans talked about
4:17
gravity before we had an understanding of the theory of gravity, right? We couldn't understand planetary motion in
4:23
the night sky as being the same as what's holding us here on Earth. And so I think we don't have the language to
4:29
understand what life is. We don't understand ourselves. And so that's actually what we're trying to do. So the
4:34
title of the talk is an informationational theory for life. And I started very early in my career thinking about information, but it's
4:40
transformed quite a bit. So I'm going to kind of show you this the current state of it. It starts with this question. Are
4:46
we alone? I think probably most of us in this room hopefully have thought about this at least once. Not are we alone
4:51
like as a person, but are we alone in the universe? And usually when we think about this question, we think about the
4:57
immensity of space, all of the stars and galaxies out there. So the image in the background here is the Hubble Deep
5:03
Field. And the Hubble Deep Field is a tiny image on the night sky as far as spatial volume, but it contains millions
5:09
of galaxies. And each galaxy has billions of stars. And I've been told most of my career that surely life must
5:16
be common in the universe because there's lots of territory for it to emerge. But the facts of the matter are
5:22
that we only know this planet is inhabited and we don't know if there's any life in any of those billions of galaxies out
5:28
there. And I would like to know I don't know about you guys. Would would you guys like to know? Yes, we want to know.
5:35
Okay, good. All right, I'm in the right crowd. All right, good. The curious lot is here. All right, fantastic. So, how
5:41
do we come to understand whether any of these stars, any of the planets that we found around stars in our own galaxy
5:46
actually is inhabited? I think this is a good question for the long now because I don't think it's a year-long problem for
5:53
us. I don't think it's a decade long problem. This is at least a century or you know millennial long problem. We've been asking this question for a long
5:59
time and I'm hoping that our generation can get us closer. But currently the way we understand the world is by actually
6:07
collecting data from our telescopes and building simulations of that
6:12
data. Right? So this is just a spatial map of the galaxies that I had in that
6:19
picture. And in fact, when we start to model the universe and we try to understand it, we have kind of ways that
6:25
we think about modeling and paradigms that we use that are centuries old in
6:31
the way that we think about how the universe works. So this picture of the
6:38
spatial map of the galaxy actually looks a little bit like this picture. This
6:44
picture is a cellular automa. And so for those that might not know what a cellular automa is, it's a very simple
6:49
computational model. And people in my field of complex systems or one of the many fields I I have worked in that
6:55
study emergent complexity like to use these simple toy models because they
7:00
display very complex dynamical patterns. So if I took this model and I
7:05
actually ran it, this one particular one I'm showing is called the game of life. You might see a richness of the kind of
7:13
patterns that are displayed. And this is just a very short clip, but you could go online after the talk if you're super
7:18
curious and play with the game of life for hours. People have been discovering patterns in it for decades. It's actually really kind of an interesting
7:23
niche culture. But what happens in this model is it's actually assuming a kind
7:30
of dynamical system that Newton came up with originally when he was thinking about trying to understand motion in the
7:36
physical world and mechanical laws of motion. And so what we do when we try to
7:41
study the universe is we simulate it with our models. And the kinds of simulations we have currently assume
7:47
some kind of initial condition and some fixed rule that governs the universe for all time. And so when we study emerging
7:55
complexity in the game of life, we're assuming the rules never change. We're assuming nothing about the universe
8:00
fundamentally changes because of the patterns in it. And this is not what we experience as living things. We've lived
8:05
enough history as humans to know that our ideas, our culture, the things we do
8:11
actually change the structure of the reality around us. And so this paradigm doesn't fit us anymore. We don't have
8:16
the right paradigm for understanding the reality we actually live in. It's not the paradigm written 300 years ago in
8:23
theoretical physics. And so the question that I'm interested in tonight, but just
8:29
more fundamentally since I've been working on the origin of life my entire career is how does the knowledge of this
8:34
particular problem transform this kind of fundamental level of understanding that we have about
8:39
reality. And so we can think about the sort of models of the universe we've built over the centuries. So this one is
8:45
a model of the solar system and this was derived over many centuries. It started,
8:52
you know, very early with epicycles and this idea of, you know, trying to build predictive models of planetary motion,
8:58
which were circles inside of circles. And you'll notice that my image here is not even accurate because they're not ellipses. But you imagine some kind of
9:04
mechanism for the universe. And the reason we came up with this mechanistic model was because we invented clocks
9:10
that could accurately keep track of time in seconds. And we used that technology
9:16
to actually accurately map planetary motion. And then with that accurate map,
9:21
we were able to realize that they were ellipses. Galileo actually figured out about inertia and Newton came up with
9:27
laws of gravitation. And so we had this model of the universe that came actually inspired by the idea of mechanical
9:34
clocks in some sense of the universe as a mechanism, a clockwork mechanism with the laws of planetary motion. And
9:41
interestingly, sort of a theme that you're going to see throughout the talk is that each new theory of physics we
9:47
develop comes with its own concept of time. And the time we inherited from
9:52
Newton's generation is that time is linear. It's a substance the universe moves through. If you notice planetary
9:58
motion, we have laws. The laws remain fixed and time is is something that this
10:04
system actually passes through. It's not an active property of the system. Later we came up with the laws of
10:10
thermodynamics. Again trying to look at the real world and understand it. We invented steam engines. We needed
10:15
theories that actually helped us understand how they worked. This became thermodynamics. And we started to think
10:21
about the universe as a giant engine. The second law of thermodynamics rules all and time has a direction. The time
10:28
is a direction is a little bit antithetical to the time as linear and there are still discussions ongoing about that. But fundamentally what
10:34
thermodynamics is telling us is that time is directional. And in the last century we had sort of a
10:41
new paradigm emerge that the universe is a simulation. So this is sort of the popular zeitgeist that we're living in a
10:47
computer simulation. And interestingly enough there were actually two theories of relativity that emerged in the last
10:53
century. The one that's familiar to most of us is the special theory of relativity and general relativity which gave us the concept of relative time in
11:00
physics. But there's a relative time in computation as well, which is the fact that the same program can run at
11:06
different times on different computers. And so I think this idea of time is relative was just kind of an emergent
11:11
cultural thing in many of our theories that emerged in the last century. Now, each of the models of the universe that
11:16
emerged with the technologies of the time that I just showed you, I think still is in the same paradigm that the
11:22
universe doesn't fundamentally change over time and the rules are fixed. Interestingly enough, we have a theory
11:30
that emerged in the 1800s as an explanation for biological forms, the theory of evolution, which Darwin is
11:37
most famous for. And he actually, you know, was really frustrated um by the fact that we didn't have laws as simple
11:44
as Newton's laws to describe life. But he still came up with very elegant theories and ideas about how to explain
11:49
it. And the juxaposition I want you to hold in your mind is this idea of fixed laws, fixed rules that govern our
11:55
universe. The universe is predictable, deterministic with this idea of endless forms. What does it really mean to have
12:03
endless forms? Is that really possible in the universe as we understand it now?
12:08
Is that really possible in the actual physical universe? And if the real universe can do endless forms, what
12:14
would that kind of physics look like? Our planet seems to have that. So, we're going to talk about the question, are we
12:20
alone? But we're going to talk about it as a lens of what are we? Because I
12:26
think if we don't fundamentally understand ourselves and we don't understand how we're architecting our reality, we don't understand what we
12:31
would look like from the outside, we're not going to be able to recognize things like us in the universe. We're not going
12:36
to know what we're talking about because we don't have the languages to talk to each other about the phenomena of life.
12:42
In fact, in my field, this is really funny. Um so sorry I'm laughing already
12:47
because I I just remember being a posttock and going to a conference at a chemistry uh meeting and one of my
12:53
colleagues stood up and said life does not exist and this was sort of the opening of their talk and this is the
12:58
culture of chemists working on the origin of life is it's much easier to assume the phenomena of life doesn't exist then to tackle it head-on and in
13:06
fact there's similar things that you know once you look at molecules it's very clear life is not there and you can
13:11
just reduce everything to the parts of living things but of Of course, there's also the paradox that no atom in your
13:17
body is alive, yet you are alive as a living entity. And I certainly I don't know how many people in here think they're
13:23
alive. Okay, cool. All right, good. I didn't see any chairs raise their hands,
13:28
but I saw most of the people. Okay, I think we're we're getting the categories moderately right. I personally felt uh
13:35
like deeply existentially perplexed. I would go to these meetings on origins of
13:41
life and almost no one was talking about the origin of life. They were talking about other problems. How do you make a
13:47
protein or an amino acid which is a component of a protein? Like how do you make the parts of living things
13:53
prebiotically? If we take everything apart about what we are and we try to engineer it in an experiment. To me, as
14:00
I think about it now, it's not how I understood it then. Basically, they're deconstructing four billion years of evolution and they're using intelligent
14:07
design to replace it. And this is not the question we need to ask. The question we need to ask is how does the
14:13
universe generate information and complexity when it has none. That is the origin of life. And I think that
14:22
question has some really interesting consequences which we're going to explore tonight. And one thing I want
14:28
you to think about when I'm talking about the concepts is the idea that
14:33
theories themselves are technologies. So one of the reasons I walk through these models of the universe is that each one
14:40
has framed fundamentally how we think about ourselves and our place in the universe. So imagine using fundamental
14:47
physics to inform your daily life philosophy. Now it's not something everyone does, but some people do. And
14:53
the reason I I I like picking on this example is even if theoretical physics
14:59
and the ideas that uh come out of that exercise seem very esoteric to you and
15:05
part of a small part of a community that has little to do with the daily workings of everyone else on the planet. These
15:12
ideas percolate and they are part of the sort of base layer of understanding of our reality and they become part of
15:19
human culture over time. And so I think we have a deep responsibility to actually cultivate theories as
15:24
technologies that are actually enabling for the future and that our theories themselves need to paint optimistic
15:30
views about what we are and our place in the universe. They also need to actually correspond to reality which is the hard part um of being a physicist. For me
15:38
science fundamentally when you really think about science as a human endeavor it's not about the experiment and the
15:44
hypothesis testing. It's about building explanations for how the world works
15:49
that last centuries. That's what we try to do as scientists at the base level of what we do. And all of the things that
15:55
individual scientists do, we're trying to fill in that narrative. It's the the narrative of reality that we want to tell
16:01
ourselves. So, I'm going to start talking now about life and the work that I'm doing uh with my collaborators.
16:08
Metrology is a word that I've only run into recently. Um, I like challenging myself by suddenly immersing myself in
16:14
different fields. And metrology is the science of measurement. And you would think as a physicist I would have understood what a measurement was in my
16:20
undergrad education. I can tell you I did not ever get a course in what a measurement is. And if you get into the
16:26
science of measurement, it's incredibly complex. And so one of the ways I think about measurement right now is that
16:32
measurement is the way that we take our abstract ideas and we try to map them actually to the physical world through
16:39
devices that allow us to probe the world outside of our own mind and look for structural regularities. So measurement
16:46
is actually incredibly important because it's how we map our abstraction to physical reality. And if your theory
16:53
doesn't correspond to measurement or you can't embed your abstraction in a measurement, you have no way of testing it.
16:58
And when I started working on the origin of life when I was a PhD student very reluctantly at first actually I'll have
17:04
you know I wanted to be a cosmologist I thought that was very romantic. Um and
17:10
then I realized you know like origins of life was something that no one had an idea about like no one had any
17:15
conceptual framing for this problem and that actually uh became the love of my life uh conceptually and intellectually
17:21
is is this problem. Okay. So when I was working on it at that early stage, I thought we might be able to come up with
17:27
theories, but we would never be able to test them. It turns out um there was someone else on the planet, uh Lee
17:33
Cronin, who's a chemist, who was thinking about the same problem in a very different way than I was. And Lee's
17:41
problem was that he didn't like the way that anyone was doing origin of life chemistry because of this issue of the
17:49
amount of design we were putting into the experiments. We were looking for things that are on our planet now, molecular structures, and assuming that
17:56
they were relevant to the origin of life as a general process in the universe, rather than looking for how
18:01
unconstrained chemical systems generate complexity without any design put in by
18:06
us or anything else. And so Lee is trying to build robots in his lab that
18:12
can explore chemistry as messy as possible. The messier the better because he wants to see life emerge in his lab.
18:19
And he says,"Well, if life's going to emerge in my lab, how will I measure it?" And so, this is actually the
18:26
foundations of the theory that I'm going to introduce to you. It's called assembly theory. And the conjecture of
18:32
the theory is that life is the only mechanism the universe has for generating complexity. There are no
18:38
Boltzman brains. If you know that concept, we don't get fluctuating existence of objects like in this room.
18:44
You will exist nowhere else in the universe. There's not a multiverse of possibilities. You only exist here and
18:50
you exist here because four billion years was necessary to construct you on this planet. That's the framing that we
18:56
have. So it's very contrary to current physics which has this idea that
19:02
everything can exist everywhere and there might be another you out there but it's just a very low probability or you
19:08
might just be a brain that fluctuated into existence and your experience right now is not real. All of those things are
19:14
not consistent with the paradigm that we're building. What we think is that complexity happens
19:22
because of evolution and selection and the space is so huge and the universe is
19:28
small by comparison to all the things that could create that existence is really special. If you get to exist, you
19:34
are like that's amazing. Okay, so yes,
19:40
what up for existence? All right, cool. I like this enthusiasm. I also like existing. It's great. It's better than
19:47
the alternative. All right. So, life is the only way to generate complex objects. And so, how did how did this
19:53
happen? Um, okay. So, I I just want to go through this argument. I just told you that you probably don't exist
19:59
anywhere else. Great. I'm glad we're here. Um, but how like what are we actually talking about? So, I think when
20:05
I show you the Hubble deep field, I think most of us have a sense that the universe is big, right? Because we're
20:11
told it's huge. It's 13.7 billion lightyears across and there's billions of galaxies out there. We don't actually
20:19
think about how big the space of possibilities a single planet can generate. Cominatorial space I'm going
20:26
to talk about a lot. You can think about it as the space of all configurations of something. So I had to learn chemistry
20:32
this way. Um but you can also think of Lego or you can think of language. Think of all possible ideas you could build
20:38
with human language or you can think about all possible technologies. You can think about all possible molecules. Cominatorial space is really
20:46
big. It's actually uncountably big. I'm going to give you an example of one molecule and I borrowed this example
20:51
from Lee uh which is taxol. So taxol is a molecule that's been discovered on
20:56
Earth. It's not a particularly special molecule. It's used as an anti-cancer drug. But if you wanted to make
21:03
every version of a molecule, a threedimensional structure that corresponds to the same molecular
21:08
formula and you had just one copy of each molecule, that one molecular formula would fill 1.5 universes of
21:16
volume. One molecule. So actually when chemiraticians try to compute this
21:22
number of possible molecules, they can't. We don't know how big chemical space is because we don't know how many
21:28
possible molecules there are. And so this gets into an interesting
21:33
uh question because it's like why does taxol exist on this planet and not the other possibilities? Clearly our
21:40
universe doesn't have enough time and resources to make every single molecule with tax's molecular formula. It doesn't
21:47
have enough resources to make every molecule with the same molecular formula as DNA. It doesn't have all the
21:54
resources to make all the configurations of what could be the chairs in this room. It can't exhaust all
22:00
possibilities. So this raises a fundamental question about what is the mechanism of what gets to exist? Why are
22:06
these structures the ones that actually we observe as physical objects and these other ones we might imagine? We might be
22:12
able to say something about chemical space because we observe a molecule. So we have this idea of this counterfactual
22:17
space that could exist but we actually don't observe it to exist.
22:23
the things we do exist. What our conjecture is is is they exist because evolution and selection have constrained that possibility space. There's
22:29
information in the history that makes this object and not this object. And this is where we start to get into an
22:36
actual way of building anformational theory of life. So to explain the
22:43
idea, I'm going to start with Lego because Lego is much easier for most of us than chemistry. Probably most of us
22:50
maybe have had a pile in our home that looks like this if you have children or if you just like having fun. If I was going to shake the Lego set
22:58
indefinitely, what kind of structures do we expect to arise out of this? Can all of you hold an image in your mind of
23:04
something you might build out of these Lego? Great. All right, I'm going to
23:09
also make something out of these Lego. How many of you made this? Just curious. I've never done this before.
23:16
Did anyone make this object? No. Okay. Oh, we got one. Oh, excellent.
23:22
Okay, cool. Probably we already made this object because it's been imprinted on most of our minds. We kind of most of
23:27
you probably recognize it. It's a castle at least. I hope most people know this is a castle. Okay, good. Uh, we do live
23:32
in the same selected history. Did most of you make objects that were much simpler than this? How many people made
23:38
something very simple? Okay, so even trying to make something like mentally as an exercise that's very complex is
23:43
actually quite hard because it requires a lot of steps. Um, and this is actually the way that we think about formalizing
23:49
the complexity of an object. So, I'm going to introduce assembly theory now. And I want you to think about the Lego
23:54
analogy. But the idea is if you take something down to its parts, and you take the parts and you put them
24:00
together, and then you keep doing that by putting parts together that you've built already, you will have a a
24:05
sequence of steps that's the shortest causal history for making that object. And we call that the assembly index. And
24:11
this becomes how hard it is for the universe to produce that object. That's all you need to know about it. Castles
24:17
are hard. They don't happen spontaneously. They require a lot of evolution. And in this case, it requires
24:23
a lot of human evolution because we had to have cultural evolution. We had to build castles. We had to have somebody write a book about a little boy and
24:29
magic that became wildly popular. And we also had to have Lego and billions of them on the planet. And then we get that. Okay. So, that's not an easy
24:36
object for the universe to construct. It requires a lot of history. Now, we want to formalize that idea. How do you
24:42
formalize this in an objective way? a way that you can actually do physics with. So this is where we get into the
24:48
idea that there's a property this minimal number of steps to produce an object. I'm showing it here now for ATP
24:56
which is a critical molecule in biology. For ATP the minimum number of steps
25:01
where you take bonds as fundamental units instead of Lego blocks and you put the bonds together and then you put the
25:07
things you've made already to get ATP is 21 steps. Now I can compute that for a graph of
25:13
the molecule once I understand the physics. But here's where what Lee did was really clever. He was in the lab. He
25:20
was trying to build robots to explore for origins of life. And he said, "I have a mass spec mass spectrometer. I
25:26
can do measurements on molecules by breaking them apart and looking at the mass to charge ratio of the molecules
25:33
and the fragments. If I can use this to probe how complex these structures are in a
25:39
way that I can measure, then I can do something interesting. And so this is actually the genesis of assembly theory
25:45
was thought experiments on mass spec and the fragmentation that mass spec do to resolve the causal structure of
25:51
molecules. And the exercise is that this process of breaking a molecule apart and
25:57
trying to resolve the minimal steps to rebuild it from those elementary parts actually can be mapped to measurements
26:03
in the lab. And actually Lee's lab has done it now with NMR and infrared and mass spec. So there's three different
26:08
ways that you can measure the same property of molecules. And it allows you to say the minimal amount of causation,
26:14
evolution, selection, information, whatever you want to call it for this molecule. Why is this important? Why is
26:21
it important that we can measure this kind of constructed complexity or this causation? It's important because of
26:27
this conjecture we had that life is the only thing in the universe that can build complex objects. So remember how
26:33
big the space of taxol is. Now if you're in chemical space and you add a single
26:38
bond, there's many ways you can do it. And so every time you add a single bond in those assembly steps, you're actually
26:44
increasing the complexity in a space that's exponentially growing. So the space gets larger at every step that you
26:49
take. So if you do an assembly index increase of one, you've moved into an exponentially larger space every single
26:56
step. So what we're measuring with this causal measure is is actually this compression
27:03
of selection into these objects that get to exist against this exponentially growing background. And our conjecture
27:10
is because of the structure of that space, there should be a threshold that
27:16
we should never expect to observe an object unless it's the product of life. That there was actually a selective mechanism, an information processing
27:22
system. That was where we went into it. And so Lee's lab is very clever. So this
27:27
is sort just sort of a depiction that you can take a certain number of steps and then suddenly you might have something that's alive done for origami.
27:34
The principles of assembly theory are quite general. They actually went and tested it in the lab. So this is a paper that
27:40
was published in 2021 uh building a life meter with this idea of molecular assembly. And so they went
27:46
and they took a whole bunch of samples abiotic biological dead. The conjecture uh actually held up to the experimental
27:52
test. So what was done here is the molecular assembly that I just told you
27:58
the minimum number of steps is shown on the x-axis on this plot that says life.
28:04
The only molecules that we found above assembly index 15 were products of life.
28:10
So if you take abiotic samples and actually NASA was really interested in this. So they sent samples to Lee's lab
28:16
that they had blinded and they really tried to trick him. And they sent him uh samples of merchesin which is like one of the messiest chemistries that's
28:22
abiotic. It's a meteorite very messy. And what they were able to do is using
28:28
this approach with the measurement techniques that they developed to be able to distinguish the biological from
28:33
non-biological samples. And it conformed to the theory's conjecture that there should be a very abrupt complexity
28:40
threshold and that living things were the only things that could produce things above this background because the
28:45
space is getting so exponentially large. We should never observe those objects in high abundance enough to detect them.
28:51
And if you go into pure abotic samples like meteorites, what they are is what we call tar. They're just a total rand
28:57
random mess of molecules. You can't actually even differentiate some of the molecules because there's just so much combinatorial complexity. And what life
29:04
does has selected out specific structures in high abundance that are very complex. So we can measure that.
29:10
That's pretty cool. It's very cool for me um because as a theoretical physicist, I live in abstract land most
29:18
of the time. What we're trying to do is actually look at this and use it now to build a theory. And one of the things
29:24
that we're excited about is this idea of recognizing alien life as constructed complexity. So there's clear applications to looking for life on
29:31
other worlds. If we don't know the molecules, we can actually go in and we can discover life as we don't know it.
29:38
Even life as no one knows it. And that's exciting. But what I'm really after is that explanation for what we are, the
29:45
fundamental physics of life. And I'm very excited about where assembly theory can take us with that. So what I want to
29:53
get to now is using this fundamental idea of the kind of complexity assembly
29:59
captures. This idea that there's a minimum number of causal steps to produce an object. And this somehow
30:04
tells us about how hard it is for the universe to generate that structure. We can use it actually to formalize some
30:10
really interesting theories and philosophies about the nature of life. And it's going to be a little bit
30:15
counterintuitive. Most of the history of physics is. And so a lot of the ideas I'm going to talk about seem to be
30:21
merging computation and material languages in a really weird way. Um, and that's kind of on purpose because I
30:29
think what we're doing by taking these measurements that are of this causal structure, this kind of some people
30:34
might call it a computational structure of an object. I don't like to think about it that way, but you might. What we're really doing is doing a
30:40
unification of the ideas of information as an abstract property and thinking about it now as a physical property. And
30:47
if you look at the history of physics, every time we do one of these kind of unifications, it really changes our thinking. And so that's what I'm hoping
30:53
is on the frontier here. So I'm going to talk about assembly space as if it's a physical
30:59
space because that's the way that I think about it. So we have invented many kinds of physical spaces in our history.
31:05
One of them is coordinate space and we invented that by inventing rulers and
31:11
actually measuring the physical geometry of our environment. Assembly space. You can think of this idea of the assembly
31:17
index actually measures things in this what seems to us to be an abstract space
31:23
but actually has become measurable through the advent of assembly theory of how causally deep objects
31:30
are. And if we can measure that then we can start to orient all of these complex objects in our world and root them in a
31:36
physical space. And that's actually what we're trying to do. I'm showing here an assembly space for adenosine. It's a
31:42
molecule that's very important in genetic systems. And what I want to you
31:48
to take from this is that this idea of the assembly space is actually a material property. It's one we can
31:54
measure. And we can also think of it as anformational property. Because what it's talking
31:59
about, what it's capturing is how much information and selection are in the history of that object in order for it
32:05
to exist. So it's a physical space. You can measure it. It's predictive. What does it tell us about evolution and
32:12
selection as fundamental mechanisms in our universe? So in the introduction, Ben also mentioned this idea of
32:19
selection before biology. And so we're really after this idea that all the structures that the universe creates are
32:24
selected to exist and they might exist in a larger space. And so we have some objects we can observe. They might be
32:31
molecules. They might be a Lego castle. And we can construct a space of this minimal causal history, the assembly
32:37
space, what we call assembly observed. This space tells us a lot about the
32:42
structure of what doesn't exist which is super interesting and this is where it gets into a really intriguing philosophy
32:49
and theory of information. So I'll walk you through it very briefly and kind of
32:55
quickly. We're in like the deep weeds of theoretical physics now. first layer that you can build out of that space is
33:02
imagine I take all of the Lego blocks and I and I build every single possible structure, but I don't obey the rules of
33:07
the Lego universe. I just I can glue them together. I don't have to use those little nubs or like whatever they are.
33:14
So I can build the space of all imaginable structures. Some of them are non-physical by the laws of the Lego universe. That's what we call assembly
33:20
universe. It's an imagined space. So somehow encoded in these objects is actually our ability to as intelligent
33:26
agents to extract this kind of space that it could exist but it doesn't. The second layer is assembly possible which
33:32
includes all the structures that are actually possible to construct with the rules of that universe. And so for Lego
33:38
it would be actually using the the building block brick rules to construct
33:43
objects not just assuming that they could stick together in arbitrary ways. In chemistry it's using real chemical
33:48
bonds and looking at thermodynamic stability. So there's a set of possible structures that are consistent with our laws of
33:54
physics. Those would be consistent with standard physics also. But what assembly theory offers is a second layer inside
34:01
of that. So this is kind of the third layer in the nested assembly universe which we call assembly contingent which
34:07
is the observable structures that the universe actually can build because
34:13
they're built along historically contingent trajectories. So this idea of the assembly space and looking at the
34:18
structure as actually being a physical feature means when you're actually building an evolutionary system, it has
34:24
to scaffold on the layers that came before. And because that space is so exponentially large, it can't exhaust
34:30
every layer. So by the time you get to things like us, we are so historically contingent. If you rewound history a
34:37
hundred years, we would be radically different right now because the space is so exponentially large, it becomes
34:42
unpredictable. So the real history we observe is just one such history within the structure
34:48
and our ability to access some of the other histories by looking at our own causal structure is actually one of the
34:54
mechanisms I think that we use to create novelty in the future. We can learn the rules of our own history and we can use
35:00
them to actually build into the future. So we have a way of measuring how deep you are in this assembly space.
35:06
We do it with this equation we call the assembly equation. It really only has two properties you need to worry about. It's exponential in the number of steps
35:13
because that space is exponentially expanding and it cares about how many copies you see of an object. The reason
35:19
being a one-off fluctuation doesn't imply a long lineage of things that actually could rebuild that object. So
35:25
what we're interested in is the causation on a planet like us that can make many things that are similar in
35:32
structure. So human beings are selected structures that exist on this planet. They're not exact copies, but there's
35:38
many of us because evolution actually has a reliable mechanism for generating humanlike structures. And so this this
35:44
equation is actually capturing that feature in this very abstract space and allowing us to figure out ways to measure this as a generic property of
35:51
physical systems. Now I mentioned this idea of a threshold in this exponentially
35:56
expanding space. So this is how we formalize the origin of life. The origin
36:02
of life is when things come become too complex that a historic a specific
36:08
trajectory has to actually scaffold on itself in order to get to that level of complexity. It has to build a history
36:13
and a memory. Selection has to happen. There has to be an information processing system that feeds back on itself recursively in order to construct
36:21
into the future in this space. That's the origin of life.
36:26
Otherwise you get a cominatorial mess of exploring all possibilities and our universe cannot do that for complex
36:31
things because there are too many to exist all at once. So it has to make choices is very anthropocentric
36:37
language. But this is why we get to exist and other things don't because our entire history has led to our existence
36:42
and in fact we are our history. That is the physical thing that is us. So the definition of life that I'll offer
36:49
tonight is that life is lineages of propagating information. And it's actually these causal histories occurred over um many generations and actually
36:56
physical in objects and known physics exists down here. We don't know this
37:02
transition point yet but I think assembly theory is allowing us to get close. And the origin of life happens in
37:09
chemistry originally. It's the first cominatorial space a planet generates where it can't exhaust all possibilities
37:15
and if you want to see complex structure life has to emerge on a planet. And then the origin of life actually is a
37:21
continual process that happens anytime a new combinatorial space is built. So I actually think the origin of life is a
37:27
process that happens in languages and in technologies. It's a general process of generating novelty out of cominatorial
37:33
spaces and then allowing complexity to emerge out of them. So this is the physics that we're
37:39
after is that that actual process. You might be scratching your
37:45
head. It's a little abstract. Um, it was quite funny when our paper came out. We had a a paper in nature that was very
37:51
deeply theoretical, which was like very exciting. I have never had a scientific paper go viral before. Um, so this was
37:59
my favorite meme. Uh, and that's the abstract of our paper. Uh, introducing the ideas of assembly theory. Obviously,
38:06
he's very confused. You might be saying similar things. It's it's a it's a lot of things that we folded in to really
38:12
try to get at this problem of how life arises in the universe. So, I think it's a complex set of topics. I want to talk
38:17
for a few minutes uh before wrapping up about the idea of assembly theory as an existential technology because I think
38:23
one of the reasons that our paper was so confusing is the language didn't fit. We we wrote the paper in what I felt like
38:29
as a self-consistent language and I remember these very deep arguments with Lee. I think we wrote 150 drafts of the paper with our collaborators and it was
38:35
very intense. The language I think was self-consistent but we use words in ways that people weren't familiar with. And I
38:41
think this is because it is a new idea and we're trying to really pull a whole bunch of undercurrens and conceptual
38:48
frameworks together and try to build a new language and therefore hopefully it offers a new existential technology in
38:54
the sense of the history of physics. So I already mentioned that new theories offer new concepts of time. Assembly
39:00
theory has its own concept of time which is time is material. Time is a property
39:05
of objects in the sense that we're four billion years old.
39:11
Uh, and you might say, "I'm not allowed to invent new materials." I know some
39:18
people that would beg to differ. Roger Penrose, Noel Laura in physics, does not like the word material because it
39:23
suggests we know what the material is. And Madonna lives in a material world.
39:29
And I'm pretty sure social reality is equally real to elementary particles.
39:36
And so I think if you look at the history of physics, the things we call matter are things we invented
39:42
measurements for and could embed abstract ideas in theories. So why is it we use mass and acceleration for
39:49
understanding motion? It's because we could measure those things in a very regular way and they happen to be the
39:55
right measurements to actually build into our theories of motion. But it took us a long time to figure out what measurements map to the abstractions.
40:02
And so inventing new material realities I think is something that's very consistent with the history of physics.
40:07
Another concept fundamental unit of life is not the cell, it's the lineage. And
40:14
as I mentioned, you have parts of you that are four billion years old. So I have a friend uh Michael Lochman that if
40:20
I ask him how old he is, he'll say he's 3.8 billion years old. Those are some of the that's when we think the origin of life happened. He looks good for his
40:26
age. You all also look great for your age. Um, so the the idea being that we
40:34
have been constructed on this planet across four billion years and we are the reason we're not reducible to our atoms.
40:40
Why that fundamental layer doesn't describe us is because when we do that we remove all of that time and causation. And that's actually where we
40:47
exist. That's where the causal structure is that is us is embedded in this history of time. And so I think to
40:54
understand life we have to think about time in a real physical way. And actually evolved objects, one of the
41:00
reasons they're so perplexing for us to see is because they're bigger in time than space. Imagine putting four billion years in this tiny volume of my brain.
41:07
Right? That's what we are. Four billion years of constructed complexity inside a very small volume.
41:13
I think this is one of the reasons that reality is looking increasingly virtual as we become increasingly complex
41:19
because most of the objects in our world are now deep in time and our sense perception has evolved to interact with
41:25
the spatial dimension, not the temporal dimension. Right? And so the power of theoretical physics has always been to
41:32
build abstractions that correspond to reality and allow us to see reality in new ways. And we didn't really
41:37
understand gravity. We didn't understand the curvature of the spaceime around us for most of our history. And I think we
41:43
don't understand the causal structures that were embedded in actually just how deep they are. And so information looks
41:49
like it hops around between physical materials because it's actually the structure that is embedded deep in time and it's just around us
41:55
everywhere. If you adopt this view, the largest known causal structure in the
42:03
universe collectively is our technosphere. So if we looked at our universe in
42:09
spatial volume, we look very small. But if we look at it in terms of causal time
42:16
volume, our planet is huge. And in fact, I think right now on our planet, the largest density of causal volume per
42:22
unit mass is the human brain. And this is one of the reasons that we can abstract so well. And we haven't
42:29
manifested that yet in our technology because the the sort of causal structure is much more distributed in terms of
42:35
energy per unit, mass etc. The universe
42:40
doesn't predict the future. It constructs it. What it does is predict the past. The future is undetermined
42:46
till it happens. Why? Because in the complex universe we live, the volume of things we can create is much larger than
42:53
what exists now. There's not enough information existing now to specify where we're going.
42:59
We actually live in an undeterministic universe. I think that's completely consistent with quantum mechanics. That's a whole separate conversation.
43:06
Okay. History and knowledge determine what's possible. So, I'm showing two processes that are consistent with the
43:12
laws of physics. Launching satellites into space, building high atomic number elements. Both of those things can
43:19
happen on our planet because of the knowledge that's been acquired over billions of years by and then evolving
43:24
intelligent systems like us that invent laws of physics that can launch satellites into space. Something we don't see on any other planet and can
43:30
create elements that only exist here. All right, last thing I want to
43:35
introduce which is one of my favorite is first contact in the lab. So we talk a lot about AI and alien right now. Two
43:43
concepts we don't understand. This is one of the reasons that I'm really interested in solving the original life.
43:50
And most of the time when I say this, I go places and people are like, "What are you talking about, Sarah? What does that even mean?" Um, I'm going to try to
43:56
explain what I mean a little bit better than I have before. I'm hoping I'm getting there. Um, but the idea
44:02
is we actually want to understand how the universe constructs complexity and we want to see that history. I want to
44:09
see the causal structure underlying us. I want to understand what that physics is. So quantifying the ghost in the
44:15
machine is we see all of these things being animated in our environment right now. All of our technologies are coming alive, but we actually can't see the
44:22
historical contingency that got there. We can trace information across genomes, but we can't trace information from
44:28
genomic biology into technologies. But there's information transfer between those substrates, right? Our
44:34
technologies are part of our lineage. And so we need to be able to actually see that underlying structure in order
44:39
to understand how we're evolving and co-evolving with the technologies that we're
44:47
creating. So I think we're not going to discover alien life on another planet first. I think we're going to discover
44:52
it here on Earth first. Hopefully if we're successful um by building experiments to search chemical space for
45:00
new life forms. The idea being if we can do that, we can isolate the physics of that origin life transition and really
45:06
understand how is it that our universe crosses that threshold and starts to build information processing systems and
45:12
construct a complexity. We're a tiny tiny fragment of chemical space. This is the Earth's
45:19
biosphere's complexity of of chemistry drawn as a single network. Planetary
45:25
chemistry. We exist somewhere in this giant space. There are probably other kinds of chemistry. Planets could
45:31
generate other kinds of living chemistry. So, could we build experiments that can build entirely new
45:38
lineages totally different from the one that emerged on Earth without putting the design
45:44
in, without using ourselves as intelligent designers. We want to know how the universe designs
45:49
itself. So we're trying to build experiments that allow searching for the origin of life in the lab and
45:55
understanding the source of novelty and non-determinism underlying creation. I
46:00
actually think there is no description of the universe from the outside. It's constructing itself and we want to learn
46:05
the rules of that. So first contact for me is an event. It's actually contact
46:13
like realizing we make a discovery of alien life. But more important is that first contact is an existential
46:18
technology. And to conclude, I'm going to use this f like very good in this
46:24
crowd. Um uh about the sort of structure
46:29
of the different layers that we all exist in. Um and part of my reason for this is I love fashion and I love
46:36
theoretical physics. So it's the top and bottom layer. But I also really deeply think as I mentioned before that if we
46:43
don't work on the base level of our understanding of reality, the entire structure starts to become inongruent.
46:49
So I think this idea that we need new fundamental theoretical physics to understand the time that we're living in
46:54
now and what life is and where we're going is critically important for this reason. And so with that, I'm going to
47:00
thank my lab and my amazing collaborators and all of you. And thank you guys.
47:06
[Music] That was amazing. Thanks. It's always
47:12
It's always so fun to You're great. Always so fun to listen to you. I always learn so much every time. So I have
47:18
obviously a million questions. Let maybe sort of the technosphere and this this really wonderful sort of paradox that
47:25
actually turns out not to be a paradox after all. um that the technosphere
47:30
which has the largest causal structure embedded within it which is usually
47:36
thought of as sort of the newest thing in this will is actually the oldest thing in the universe because it has the
47:42
most causal structure around it and I wonder if you could talk a little bit about differentiate or maybe it's the
47:49
same thing whether or not the causality the sort of accumulated
47:55
accumulated causation that has occurred over these billions of years that is embedded within this. That's one kind of
48:02
causality. But now the technosphere itself is also causing things, right? It
48:07
has a kind of agency perhaps mindless agency that can cause that's able to do
48:13
things that also previously couldn't be done. Is your mind is there a kind of necessary symmetry between the amount of
48:21
let's say you know evolved causality that's in something and the amount of causal agency that thing might have?
48:29
Yes. Okay. So, we're going faster than I thought. Yeah. No. Um it was fun while
48:36
you were talking which often happens when I have conversations with you. I build really nice visuals in my head. Um
48:41
so I think the way So they're absolutely related. So things that have the most
48:46
causal power in the universe are things that are deep in time. But it's it's actually very interesting because you're
48:53
most of the the time you can actually act on your past history. So where you're causal is the things that are behind you in time and the things ahead
48:59
of you are kind of this noisy horizon. So I don't think the technosphere will
49:04
have a causal power of its own until there's a larger structure on it. So it's almost like it's post-selected.
49:10
Until there's a larger structure on it. Yes. In the future at some point. Yes. What would that be? So we still have
49:15
most of the causation. Does that make you happy or sad?
49:21
Um well both. I mean I suppose like what you also talked about this you ended with said that we are co-evolving with
49:28
our with our technologies right and that like it's it's selecting on us and we're selecting on it right as well. So maybe
49:34
it's maybe it's both. Yes. I mean the whole system is being
49:39
co-constructed for sure. And so including including us. Yes. Including us. And so I think the question of
49:45
agency is quite hard because agency is very distributed for sure and it's also
49:50
temporally distributed. So I think I think it's always interesting you know the the place this also comes up is like
49:55
in questions of free will and there's like an issue about whether you have free will or not but free will is a temporally distributed property and it
50:02
depends on the actual causal act that you're aiming to do. So you know I couldn't be in Arizona right now because
50:08
I'm in San Francisco but I could be in Arizona tomorrow because I planned ahead, right? Right? So your free will is distributed over time and I think
50:14
it's the same with these causal structures that the actual causation they have is distributed in time. So
50:19
it's it's recursively deep. You could think about one structure but it's many such interacting structures and they're
50:25
all layered. Yeah. Yeah. That's clear to me anyway. I don't know any
50:31
I should have been an artist. It would have been much easier to communicate. Yeah.
50:36
Um, one of the things that you know you've been working on lately is this idea of the uh perceptual horizon. Yes.
50:45
Right. Which is maybe I ask you to um explain it a little bit more as I understand it. It has to do with the
50:52
ways in and this goes a bit to this the history of science that you that you showed that different technologies allow
50:59
us to perceive the universe in different ways. And because we can perceive the
51:04
universe in different ways, we can measure it in different ways. And and this in essence both enables and constrains the
51:11
kind of science that's possible, right? And so this this horizon is expanding, right? And perhaps computational
51:17
simulations are the latest version of it. But the idea is that this is not only changing but in in essence getting
51:23
wider or getting getting bigger. And so I wanted to ask you to explain that a little bit more. But in the context of
51:29
this question, you've said number of times that you you imagine that when we when we or when you perhaps human and
51:37
leaf discover what life really is, there'll be something like something more like the discovery of gravity. Will
51:44
that only be possible because the perceptual horizon has expanded to such a degree that that level of conceptual
51:53
granularity is possible? Yeah. Yeah. Um, so let me explain for people that
51:58
haven't heard me talk about that idea um before where it comes from. So I usually
52:04
use atom atoms as an example, right? So when atoms as elements uh were
52:10
discovered, we thought they were the like base level of reality, right? So atom comes from the ancient Greek as a
52:16
word. And when we discovered the atomic elements, we called them atoms because we we thought they were the substance
52:22
everything was made of. But subsequently we developed technology that allowed us to see substructure in the atom. And
52:27
right now the sort of leading theory of a fundamental theory of physics is string theory. And the only reason that theory is not accepted right now is
52:34
because we can't measure that deep in into so it's it's a technological hurdle
52:39
to test ideas of that theory. And so this brings to the to the forefront this
52:45
idea that the horizon of what we call fundamental actually evolves with our technology because it evolves with the
52:52
way that we can actually measure and perceive the world. LIGO is another example. Gravitational waves have been
52:58
permeating this planet for billions of years. But we took you know the invention of Einstein's general uh
53:04
theory of relativity and then LIGO to detect gravitational waves. Right? So we build all of these technologies to
53:09
perceive the world in new ways. And this led me to think that the fundamental things are not at the horizon. They're
53:16
all the constructive complexity in the horizon. Because the way that we actually expand our ways of knowing, if we think about ourselves in this causal
53:22
bubble, is by building new apparatus to explore the boundaries of our bubble. And so if we're doing that, we need to
53:30
be large enough as a causal structure to see the things smaller than us. And I think this is the transition we're
53:36
undergoing now that technologies in animating more things as alive that we're doing now is going to fold back
53:42
and allow us to understand what life is because we have to have a large enough horizon in order to see that physics.
53:50
Right? Right. So we can't you you you can't understand patterns unless you've observed enough history. Right? So we
53:57
don't even know the patterns in our own history and culture because human history hasn't been around long enough
54:02
for us to actually see regularity there. So okay so there's a question of I to
54:07
come back to in a different way so how you define the future in relationship to this but what I'm hearing you say is that technology is itself a form a form
54:14
of life but um that in order there need to be this expansion of this horizon so
54:20
that that that particular form of life can in essence recursively look back at
54:25
itself. So the question I wanted to ask in this is what would that technology be
54:31
like? What might it be? And and and maybe you already answered part of this. What would be the preconditions to its
54:37
appearance? So I think this is why I was talking about theories as existential
54:43
technologies because I think what good theories do is they allow you to see the world in a new way and that's actually
54:49
the scaffold for embedding the measurement. So I see as one of the critical technologies the conceptual
54:54
development of assembly theory which is you know a multi- collaborative effort but also I think some of them are going
55:02
to be the actual instruments in the lab and
55:09
artificial intelligence to some extent as a tool for measurement. I Well, let me let me ask you then about the uh
55:15
artificial intelligence because it seems, you know, this is an area where there's a lot of already attention paid to a kind of co-evolutionary dynamic of
55:22
this of this as well. Um, and there's in many ways a lot of focus on the role of
55:28
AI as a kind of collaborator within within science and you're sort of suggesting them as more like a
55:34
microscope. Uhhuh. So if you're looking at structures that are so large, you
55:39
need to be able to process the data and cool it like microscopes allow us to see
55:44
tiny structures and telescopes allow us to see distant structures. Artificial intelligence
55:50
algorithms allow us to see large patterns like the periphery of very
55:56
large causal structures but just the surface layer. And so I think the idea of having a theory that allows us to
56:01
understand the historical contingency that gets to these very large complex systems is the other piece of it. So
56:08
assembly theory to me is the underlying architecture of how you get to this data layer that we exist in now. And AI is
56:15
the technology of seeing that data layer. Uhhuh. Yeah. I like that. What is the role of mind in assembly in assembly
56:24
theory? Yeah, I this is something I've thought a lot about and and Lee and I
56:29
have talked a lot about and also with our groups. I think minds are are very
56:34
deep in assembly space. So I think like the examples I like to give are things
56:39
like uh perfect circles. Perfect circles are objects that can't exist as physical
56:46
structures in the world, right? Because you can't have infinite precision to make them perfect, but they're an idea that exists in our minds. So I think I
56:54
talked about this idea of the virtualization of reality. I think there's a lot of the space that exists
57:00
in this kind of virtual causal structure that actually can't be physical objects on their own but they can exist in a
57:06
virtual space in that virtual causal time as a space sorry not physical then
57:11
not coordinate space but like you know this cominatorial space um and so so I
57:17
think what's interesting about minds is because of this very large depth in time and the ability to reach into those very
57:24
abstract layers there's much more things that we can manipulate about our environment and much more creativity we
57:30
can induce in the world because we have access to these internally very large causal spaces. So, so most so to me our
57:37
ability to abstract is just evidence of how deep in time we are and those sort of those abstractions though they're
57:43
kind of idealizations you give an example of the circle but you also but you would differentiate that I believe I
57:48
mean perhaps mathematics would count as one of these abstractions you would differentiate this from neoplatonism yes
57:55
where the you know the followers of neoplato right so um yeah I'm not a platonist I like plonist I have a like I
58:02
have an allergic reaction to platonism I don't know what it is. Like it's I'm literally allergic to it intellectually.
58:09
The reason being I I don't um like I think I think it's it's much more constructive and and this is probably
58:15
the materialist in me and I'm not sure if it's the Madonna or Penrose version of the materialist um because both are
58:21
juxaposed in my mind. To me, reality is great. Um and there's no reason with
58:27
thinking that like anything exists more than what exists here. And I think if we
58:32
fold all of that in and we really think about the things in our mind and these abstract ideas we have as physical
58:37
features of our reality and not in some imagined reality out there, it tells us much more about what's actually
58:43
happening. And so the way that I think about abstractions is I want to know what the
58:50
abstractions themselves are as physical architectures. And so mathematics to me is particularly interesting because
58:56
mathematics is supposed to be a universal language and it corresponds to a lot of objects in the world but really
59:02
what it is is like our mind's ability to actually causally influence the future
59:07
because of the kind of patterns that exist in our own architecture. And so I see math as not and science actually
59:14
generally not as predictive but as constructive as I mentioned in the talk that these things that we do are
59:20
actually part of the mechanism of how our planet is generating possibilities and moving into the future and I think
59:26
that's actually much more helpful because it gives us a lot of agency and control over things and a lot more understanding about us fundamentally
59:33
than assuming there's some reality out there that we don't have access to yet that reality is somehow supervening on
59:39
us and controlling And this is also where the I think corresponds with your your insistence about materiality of information. Yes.
59:47
Right. Right. This is not a this is this is a real thing. I mean if it kicks it's real information. I mean I mean I don't
59:54
think there's anybody in this room that doubts that information is influencing their life. Like I I just I think there's no there's no sense to think
1:00:01
that these things are not physical. Yeah. This goes a little bit to the this relationship between assembly theory and
1:00:07
philosophy of science once again. um what are the falsifiable predictions that assembly theory can make? So one of
1:00:15
them is that you could have arbitrarily high complexity objects happen outside of an evolutionary process and so far we
1:00:22
haven't observed that. So we don't we don't observe you know cell phones spontaneously fluctuating into existence
1:00:28
on Mars for example they exist on our planet. Um that would be counter to assembly theory. I also think uh you
1:00:35
know one of the tests that Lee and I have been talking about is the idea that there's a minimal construction time for
1:00:41
any object. And so you know Lee's a brilliant experimentalist. I think if anybody could figure out how to do it uh
1:00:47
he would but it's a tough problem but if you if you could devise an experiment to actually demonstrate that something
1:00:54
can't fluctuate into existence and it requires some history. So what would that experiment be? You know, we get
1:01:00
asked a lot about experimental tests and I think there are many that we will devise just like gravity has many tests,
1:01:06
but there's also this idea of explanations, right? And so gravity is a
1:01:12
language that we now use to describe this regularity of like why we're stuck to our chairs, but it's also something like our ancestors observed and their
1:01:19
ancestors observed. And so I think there are like deep things we know about the world and we don't have languages for.
1:01:25
And I think assembly theory is a language for this deep regularity. And so in some sense I don't I don't know
1:01:31
how you test an explanation that seems obvious. Do you see what I mean? It's it's like it's a hard thing to do. Um
1:01:38
and so you can test the the sort of features of the mathematical theory and if it fits, but I also really believe
1:01:45
that this deep layer of what science is doing is building better explanations and the explanations are what carry us
1:01:50
forward. And so I don't know what to do with that. I think uh I think I think science is much more varied
1:02:00
uh than people traditionally. I I really like this idea of epistemological anarchy in science. Paul fire yeah um
1:02:10
yeah okay here's an experiment for you. Um, mass spectrometry may help measure
1:02:15
assembly index for molecules, but how do you measure more complex or abstract forms of quote
1:02:22
unquote life like uh a technology or a culture? So, the challenge we have with
1:02:29
assembly theory right now is we think the theory is quite general, but developing it for new substrates to test
1:02:34
the principles is quite hard. So, we've done it for two in a rigorous way so far. one is molecules and the second one
1:02:40
is crystal materials like minerals and silicon chips. Um and so there you can tell the difference between a natural
1:02:46
min mineral and a technologically engineered mineral uh which we call silicon in a very precise way in
1:02:52
assembly theory. But the challenge we have is this idea of assembly index has to be embedded in a measurement scheme.
1:02:59
So you have to have some way of actually deconstructing what you think the causation in the object is. not your
1:03:04
model of the causation but what that how the universe actually generates that structure in terms of what causal constraints what laws of physics are at
1:03:11
play and you have to and you have to be able to look at this the that as a substrate specific property so once you
1:03:19
can build the assembly space for the material then you can apply assembly theory but the assembly space is very
1:03:24
non-trivial because I and this is where assembly theory I think fundamentally differs from computation because computation is this like we can build
1:03:31
computational models for everything but there's one assembly space for a particular selective mechanism. And so
1:03:37
the universe might be a self- constructing system and all of these spaces have different sets of laws and
1:03:43
constraints in them and different kinds of contingency and assembly spaces can be nested in other assembly spaces. Um
1:03:49
and so I think I what we need to do is to demonstrate
1:03:55
it in enough materials to show that life is a general phenomena. That's what I'm interested in actually. So I I think the
1:04:02
question is also about things that we that you would call real and physical like a culture. Yep. But are aren't
1:04:09
necessarily material in the same sort of way. And so the question is how like presumably
1:04:15
some cultures are more like some languages are more complex than other but but the question becomes hard right
1:04:21
so which substrate do you use for constructing the assembly space of language? Do you use vocalization? Do you use written word? Do you use what's
1:04:28
actually imprinted in computers? And so without actually understanding the architecture of how these things are
1:04:34
embedded in the substrate like we don't know what they are you know I think like language for example like people think
1:04:40
we understand language language is a set of patterns that some entities on this planet iterate like utter to other
1:04:46
entities on the planet right like so if we're looking at that as an objective thing outside of ourselves and asking
1:04:51
what is that as a physical causal structure it's a highly non-trivial problem um and so I think I think it's possible
1:04:59
um but I don't want to give you easy answers to it because I think it's a really hard challenge. Yeah, fair enough. If there are other substrates
1:05:05
that on which life can form, are there be other substrates that can hold minds?
1:05:11
And the other question which is probably related to this which is interest phrase and interesting way when is AI life.
1:05:19
Okay. When is an interesting way of getting that? So I think any substrate that has enough cominatorial richness
1:05:26
kind of an open maybe an uncomputable one. So I talked about the fact that all all possible molecules are actually not
1:05:33
computable like we don't have enough resources in the entire planet to generate all of chemical space in a model.
1:05:39
Um there are some so those are the ones that I think are interesting because they're capable of open-ended
1:05:46
complexity. I think that's actually the one that we're interested with respect to life. Now one place that we've applied assembly theory actually there's
1:05:53
one other substrate I didn't mention which is an atmosphere. So, uh, molecules, minerals, and and
1:05:58
atmospheres. I think we're pretty confident on atmospheres because we're interested in life detection on exoplanets. And atmospheres are kind of
1:06:05
interesting because they're not combinatorially rich. There's about 16,000 volatile molecules that probably
1:06:10
could be in an atmosphere. So, it's a really small space. And so, I think if you look at the transition to life in an
1:06:15
exoplanet atmosphere, the the sort of selection constraints you see are very
1:06:20
weak. So I think we can pick up signatures of it, but it's not this very sharp transition. So I think living
1:06:28
worlds in terms of the imprint of selection in their atmosphere are on kind of a continuum with non-living
1:06:33
worlds. But I think there's still a transition we can pick up. But substrates that have very deep
1:06:38
combinatorial rich structure can enter an open end cascade. Those are the things that we really call living.
1:06:45
Again, distinction between life and living. Yeah. And the ones that are very deep structures in that space can have
1:06:51
minds. And I think AI is shallow right now. But I think the
1:06:58
integrated structure of our technologies on this planet is getting deeper. But any particular model to me is is still a
1:07:04
very shallow system. Again, it goes back to this idea of like are you processing the data at the outer periphery, which I
1:07:11
think is what we're doing right now, or are you building structures that are deep? And so it's very unclear to me
1:07:17
about how the predictive algorithms are are they things that we're interacting with and we're seeing them as being
1:07:22
causally deep because we're deep. But the actual embedding of that and the physical architecture might be still quite shallow. But so that's the
1:07:30
question is is are they are they experiencing are they act like what is what is the what is the reality of a
1:07:35
silicon chip processing a large language model? You don't want to ask about the output,
1:07:41
right? The output is what we read on a screen. It's a it's a predictive. What is it like to be a chip? What is it like
1:07:46
to be a large language model embedded in a physical architecture? I don't think any of us know what that is. No, I don't
1:07:52
think any of us do know what it is. But presumably on the on the depth question um that you know that if if it is
1:07:58
essentially something that we have made, we sort of invested our depth in this and when we're with part of the technosphere that there would be a lot
1:08:04
of evolutionary time embedded in these large embedded in these large models like the things. You put you put a lot
1:08:10
of time in in a small space, but most of that time is just the linguistic component right now or or certain kinds
1:08:16
of structure of the p just just to use llens as an example. Yeah. Evolution of language in that regard. That's right.
1:08:22
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you're and and I think I think the thing that's interesting to me is is the interaction
1:08:28
with words, right? So words are shifting meaning all the time. And if I asked everybody in well, we did ask this what
1:08:34
what is life? like there were probably as many different answers for that as there are people in the room, right? So,
1:08:40
so the fact that there's a predictive correlation between that word and other words doesn't necessarily capture all the conceptual foundations underneath
1:08:46
it. And so I think again it goes back to the causal richness of the history and how we actually build meaning is mostly
1:08:52
about our physical architecture, not these predictive associations of words.
1:08:57
Yes. which is why we have disinformation issues and all these other things because you have people with radically different causal histories interacting
1:09:03
and the words mean totally different things and they're trying to like cloud each other's perceptions of reality and it's really easy to do with the surface
1:09:08
layer if you're not seeing the structure underneath and you're not seeing the experience of an individual you can assume they have bad intentions when they don't yeah I mean there's a whole
1:09:15
another question about spatial AI or analog which has to do with more sort of embedded knowledge but that's that's be another talk um we need to wrap it up
1:09:22
here um and I just want to first of all say thank you on behalf of the whole audience for this such a rich body of
1:09:29
ideas to think with um as assembly theory as a scaffold for many things to come next and sort of thanks thanks for
1:09:36
this thanks for your time. Yeah. [Music]
1:09:42
[Applause] [Music]